Citation: Ghasemkhani, B.; Kut, R.A.;
Yilmaz, R.; Birant, D.; Arıkök, Y.A.;
Güzelyol, T.E.; Kut, T. Machine
Learning Model Development to
Predict Power Outage Duration
(POD): A Case Study for Electric
Utilities. Sensors 2024, 24, 4313.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s24134313
Academic Editors: Jarosław Kurek
and Bartosz ´Swiderski
Received: 2 May 2024
Revised: 25 June 2024
Accepted: 27 June 2024
Published: 2 July 2024
Copyright:
© 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Article
Machine Learning Model Development to Predict Power
Outage Duration (POD): A Case Study for Electric Utilities
Bita Ghasemkhani 1,*
, Recep Alp Kut 2, Reyat Yilmaz 3
, Derya Birant 2
, Yi˘git Ahmet Arıkök 4
,
Tugay Eren Güzelyol 4
and Tuna Kut 5
1
Graduate School of Natural and Applied Sciences, Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir 35390, Turkey
2
Department of Computer Engineering, Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir 35390, Turkey;
alp@cs.deu.edu.tr (R.A.K.); derya@cs.deu.edu.tr (D.B.)
3
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir 35390, Turkey;
reyad.yilmaz@deu.edu.tr
4
General Directorate, Gdz Electricity Distribution, Izmir 35042, Turkey;
yigit.arikok@gdzelektrik.com.tr (Y.A.A.); tugayeren.guzelyol@gdzelektrik.com.tr (T.E.G.)
5
Semafor Teknoloji, Dokuz Eylul Technology Development Zone (DEPARK), Izmir 35330, Turkey;
tuna.kut@semaforteknoloji.com
*
Correspondence: bita.ghasemkhani@ogr.deu.edu.tr
Abstract: In the face of increasing climate variability and the complexities of modern power grids,
managing power outages in electric utilities has emerged as a critical challenge. This paper intro-
duces a novel predictive model employing machine learning algorithms, including decision tree
(DT), random forest (RF), k-nearest neighbors (KNN), and extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost).
Leveraging historical sensors-based and non-sensors-based outage data from a Turkish electric utility
company, the model demonstrates adaptability to diverse grid structures, considers meteorological
and non-meteorological outage causes, and provides real-time feedback to customers to effectively
address the problem of power outage duration. Using the XGBoost algorithm with the minimum
redundancy maximum relevance (MRMR) feature selection attained 98.433% accuracy in predicting
outage durations, better than the state-of-the-art methods showing 85.511% accuracy on average over
various datasets, a 12.922% improvement. This paper contributes a practical solution to enhance
outage management and customer communication, showcasing the potential of machine learning to
transform electric utility responses and improve grid resilience and reliability.
Keywords: power outage duration prediction; XGBoost; power disruption; electricity distribution;
machine learning; power system; power interruption; MRMR
1. Introduction
A reliable power supply is the cornerstone of modern society, playing an indispensable
role in facilitating the seamless functioning of various sectors and enhancing the quality of
life for individuals. The ubiquity of electricity has transformed from a mere convenience
to an absolute necessity, impacting essential aspects of daily life, including agriculture,
healthcare, education, communication, environmental sustainability, economic prosperity,
transportation, public safety, and overall well-being [1–8]. This pervasive dependence
on electricity underscores the critical need for uninterrupted power availability in our
interconnected and technology-driven world. As the reliance on digital technologies
continues to grow, electricity demand is poised to escalate; it is not only essential for
current operations but also for powering the innovations that will deﬁne the future.
However, the specter of power outages, characterized by temporary disruptions in
the continuous ﬂow of electricity, poses a signiﬁcant challenge to electric utilities and their
communities. These outages, colloquially referred to as blackouts or electrical failures, arise
from many factors, ranging from catastrophic weather conditions and natural disasters
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24134313
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
2 of 29
to equipment failures and the intricate conﬁgurations of power grids. The dynamic and
multifaceted nature of these outage events necessitates innovative solutions for effective
management and mitigation. Also, the restoration of power to affected areas demands
not only time but also an intricate understanding of the grid conﬁguration, the identiﬁ-
cation of fault points, and the probable duration of the outage to undertake the requisite
preparations [9].
Furthermore, outage management is a critical component of maintaining customer
satisfaction, as customer complaints and dissatisfaction can intensify when power is not
restored promptly or when communication is lacking about the duration of an outage. On
the customer side, the consequences of power outages are equally profound and are just
as signiﬁcant as the effects faced by the utility companies or the broader society. Modern
lifestyles depend on reliable electricity, and outages disrupt critical functions and daily life.
The problem of power outage strikes at the heart of critical functions, affecting the operation
of utilities and deeply impacting the lives and livelihoods of customers and communities.
Therefore, effective outage management is absolutely a fundamental necessity to maintain
the stability and resilience of contemporary lifestyles [10].
In the current age of data-driven decision making and artiﬁcial intelligence, the electric
utility sector is on the cusp of a transformative evolution in outage management. Machine
learning, a subﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), has emerged as a robust resource to address
complicated problems across various ﬁelds. Within the domain of power distribution,
predicting power outage duration is a crucial facet that demands thorough consideration.
Power outage duration refers to the period during which a disruption in the electricity
supply occurs. This disruption can result from various factors, including natural disasters,
equipment failures, or human errors. The signiﬁcance of accurately forecasting power
outage duration lies in its potential to equip utility providers and consumers with valuable
insights. Such predictions contribute to proactive decision making in resource allocation,
disaster preparedness, and infrastructure planning.
By leveraging extensive datasets, advanced algorithms, and real-time inputs, machine
learning enables the creation of predictive models that can adapt, learn, and reﬁne their
predictions, offering the potential to revolutionize the efﬁciency and accuracy of power out-
age duration estimation. Furthermore, the intricate nature of contemporary power systems,
coupled with the increasing integration of sustainable energy sources, has prompted a
notable surge in implementing machine learning techniques for predictive analysis within
the power sector. These methodologies present fresh perspectives on system dynamics,
contribute to heightened forecasting precision, and furnish real-time decisions to elevate
the effectiveness and dependability of power systems [11].
The growing utilization of machine-learning-based techniques in the predictive anal-
ysis of power systems has the potential to be attributed to their adeptness in managing
extensive datasets. The widespread adoption of sensors and other data collection tools
within the context of power systems results in the generation of huge amounts of data. The
machine learning models possess the capacity to instantaneously process these data and
extract patterns between them that is challenging to identify through traditional methods.
Moreover, machine learning can learn from past experiences to forecast future events [12].
Furthermore, these approaches offer a greater degree of ﬂexibility compared with tradi-
tional methods. As power systems undergo continuous evolution and complexity, machine
learning algorithms are appropriate options to adjust to dynamic conditions. Such capabili-
ties empower the operators of utilities to address emerging challenges promptly [13].
In addition to machine learning models, classical statistical or mathematical models
play a signiﬁcant role in electric power forecasting based on classical statistical theories
and mathematical principles. Classical statistical models typically involve making pre-
sumptions regarding the fundamental distribution of the data and estimating factors based
on observed samples. Examples of classical statistical methods include linear regression,
logistic regression, analysis of variance (ANOVA), and hypothesis testing. These methods
are often grounded in the principles of probability and statistics, and their application
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
3 of 29
involves adherence to certain assumptions and conditions. Also, the integration of com-
posite approaches has made substantial advancements in electric power prognostication,
combining the strengths of both traditional and advanced methodologies for enhanced
predictive accuracy and robustness [14]. Several statistical methods are already applied in
different studies of electric power systems and compared with intelligent methods that are
revealed as the most popular ones [15,16].
Although machine learning techniques in electric power distribution systems have
been extensively studied [17–31], our classiﬁcation model stands out for its accurate outage
duration forecasting and real-time customer feedback. This model introduces a ground-
breaking predictive method that leverages the capabilities of machine learning models.
It was developed through an empirical case study utilizing historical outage data from a
Turkish electric utility company and transcends conventional approaches by incorporating
diverse grid structures and considering both meteorological and non-meteorological outage
causes. Before exploring the technical intricacies, it is essential to highlight the key contribu-
tions of this study that distinguish it in the domain of power outage duration forecasting:
(i)
A novel machine learning model for power outage duration prediction with an
impressive accuracy of 98.433% over a substantial real-world dataset provided by an
electric utility, outperforming state-of-the-art methods with an average accuracy of
85.511% on different datasets, offering a 12.922% improvement.
(ii)
The ﬁrst study to employ both XGBoost and MRMR algorithms together to construct
a predictive model for power outage management, conﬁguring various hyperpa-
rameters of XGBoost such as objective function, monotone constraints, learning rate,
minimum child weight, maximum depth of trees, and number of boosting rounds.
(iii)
Originality in addressing the outage duration prediction task as a classiﬁcation prob-
lem with distinct time duration classes of very short, short, medium, and long time,
contrasted with previous studies that predominantly proposed regression-based and
statistical solutions.
(iv)
Introduces a unique approach by selecting features based on the MRMR technique,
which effectively identiﬁes the importance scores of dataset properties. It not only
enhances the interpretability of the model but also contributes signiﬁcantly to the
overall predictive accuracy by focusing on the most relevant aspects of the dataset.
(v)
Deep investigation of various machine learning algorithms, including decision tree
(DT), random forest (RF), k-nearest neighbors (KNN), and extreme gradient boosting
(XGBoost) to select the most efﬁcient model based on a diverse array of evaluation met-
rics, including Accuracy, Precision, F1-Score, Recall, Support, Macro Avg, Weighted
Avg, and Confusion Matrix.
(vi)
Demonstration of practical applicability by testing the proposed method on real-world
test sets for several ranges of months, obtaining consistent results that were evaluated
and approved by the utility in each iteration.
As we explore the intricacies of our machine-learning-based model and its application,
the subsequent sections describe the related works, employed methodology, analyzed
dataset, and obtained results. Comparisons against individual algorithms highlight the
excellence of our approach. Additionally, we discuss broader implications and future works
for the electric utility sector in the face of evolving challenges.
2. Literature Review
Power outage prediction models play a pivotal role in ensuring the reliability of the
electricity supply during extreme conditions and natural disasters. In recent research, sev-
eral innovative approaches have been explored to enhance the accuracy and effectiveness
of these models. In [32], the authors propose a smart power grid allocation technique
that incorporates public opinions by mining microblog tweets. This approach examines
the need for power restoration and evaluates secondary disaster risks. The study utilizes
optimization algorithms, including the A-star path and stud genetic algorithm (Stud GA),
demonstrating successful results in mitigating negative sentiments and ensuring timely
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
4 of 29
public electricity demand during events like the Chaba typhoon in 2022. Another signiﬁ-
cant contribution comes from the work [33], where a new model is formulated to construct
a synthetic electrical grid layout based on publicly accessible data. This model simulates
power disruptions at buildings subjected to different hazard loadings, offering localized
assessments of power loss probabilities due to natural hazards.
Advancements in machine learning models have been instrumental in improving
the accuracy of power outage prediction models. In [34], the authors employ a stacking
ensemble learning technique for forecasting outage duration within typhoon disasters. This
method utilizes various machine learning models, incorporating extreme gradient boosting
(XGBoost), random forest (RF), and extra tree (ET), showing promising results in accurately
forecasting outage durations during severe weather events like the Chapaka typhoon in
2021. The study [35] introduces two different outage prediction models (OPMs) for forecast-
ing power disruptions triggered by ice and snow storms. These models, based on machine
learning (ML) and the generalized linear model (GLM), respectively, demonstrate different
strengths. The GLM excels in predicting extreme events, while the machine learning meth-
ods offer superior results for less-impactful occurrences and provide more accurate spatial
dispersion insights for power outages. Similarly, [36] addresses the prediction of electricity
outages caused by weather events in the context of climate change and its potential impact
on power grid reliability, in which an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) model using the
back-propagation algorithm is introduced. This model proves effective, outperforming
conventional approaches like multiple linear regression (MLR) and exponential smoothing
(ES) in forecasting electricity outages related to weather-induced faults in electricity grids.
Addressing the challenge of anticipating the impact of tropical cyclone winds on power
transmission systems, Huang and Wang [37] propose an adaptive nested dynamic down-
scaling (ANDD) method. This method acknowledges terrain characteristics, topology, and
transmission system malfunctioning processes, adapting in real time to evolving cyclones.
The study illustrates the strategy’s advantages using the electricity transmission network
in China, speciﬁcally amidst Super Typhoon Lekima. In [38], an AI-based grid-hardening
model is also reported to enhance resilience in extreme weather. This model predicts the
component states of outages and operations through machine learning and strategically
places distributed generation units. Simulations on the IEEE 118-bus system demonstrate
improved robustness against multiple component outages during extreme events with
decentralized energy resources. Moreover, focusing on the reliability enhancement of
local energy systems, Hooshmand et al. [39] present a two-layered power management
system for setups featuring storage and distributed generation. This approach addresses
the complexity of diverse energy suppliers and is evaluated by simulating the energy
system of an Indian base transceiver station, incorporating real load data and historical
outage information.
Xu et al. [40] delve into the deployment of a conﬁguration plan for emergency power
supply vehicles tailored for extreme weather conditions. The study introduces an ensemble
learning algorithm, the XGBoost classiﬁcation model, to counter unplanned power outages
stemming from equipment failures. This model surpasses traditional classiﬁcation methods
and other ensemble learning approaches in accurately forecasting outage incidents. In [41],
large-scale power outages are predicted using a universal framework and a theoretical
model without infrastructure damage. For events causing damage, outage duration and
restoration probability hinged on access and repair challenges. It also derived reliability
requirements for emergency power systems, demonstrated through cases like Hurricane
Katrina and Fukushima. This work is conﬁrmed for the probability and duration of power
outages, encompassing normal and extended scenarios caused by severe events with
repair difﬁculties.
In [42], the authors focus on improving predictions of extreme-weather-related power
outages through a data-intensive model. This model forecasts the impact on power grids,
including datasets with various storm examples and predictors. The study underscores the
need for multifaceted hazard descriptions in future analyses of extreme weather impacts.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
5 of 29
Introducing a deep neural network (DNN) ensemble model for estimating power outages
in overhead distribution systems, Das et al. [43] consider environmental factors. The
model employs a partitioning approach for the input space, where each neural network
in the ensemble focuses on estimating outages in a speciﬁc segment. A new algorithm
is presented for simultaneous training of the neural networks and optimal input space
partitioning, demonstrating a signiﬁcant improvement in estimating outages caused by
wind and lightning. Also, the authors examine power outage data in a U.S. utility’s service
area, with a speciﬁc focus on outages caused by weather events [44]. It advocates for using
a deep neural network trained and tested on outage data to predict restoration and repair
durations, aiding utilities in scheduling repair work and dispatching crews, especially
during extreme weather conditions in the distribution network.
In [45], the authors conduct an examination of the frequency and length of interrup-
tions in a distribution grid system. They utilize outage data and employ gradient-boosting
regressor and random forest to determine the paramount features in forecasting the length
of outages. The study ﬁnds that climatic conditions, equipment failures, and wind speed
emerge as the most signiﬁcant predictors of outage length in the dataset under analysis.
Zhao et al. [46] investigate the linear and nonlinear correlations between outage duration
and weather factors using Pearson and distance correlation coefﬁcients. The gradient-
boosting decision tree (GBDT) algorithm assesses the contribution ratio of various weather
factors in the prediction model. This is achieved by generating a predictive model that
correlates weather-inﬂuencing factors with response variables.
In [47], a machine learning classiﬁer using Bayes decision theory is presented to pre-
dict power system component outages during extreme weather events. The proposed
approach minimizes prediction errors, accounts for the cost of preventive actions, and seeks
to improve power system resilience through operation-oriented measures. The impact of
power outages resulting from weather-related natural disasters on the revenue of electric
power suppliers is investigated in [48]. The study examines the relationship between key
properties such as outage duration and revenue to offer insights for electric power suppliers,
emphasizing the importance of risk assessment and strategic system planning measures.
In [49], the authors focus on predicting power outages, critical for planning responses and
maintenance in power systems specializing in frequent non-weather-related (NOW) out-
ages. The authors developed forecasting models with outage data in Massachusetts through
advanced techniques including the Bayesian optimization, Prophet model, and hierarchical
prediction. Both Prophet-TPE and hierarchical Prophet-Bottom-Up outperformed other
models in predicting non-weather outage counts. The analyses indicate a troubling pattern
in the expansion of non-weather-related outages in Massachusetts, prompting potential
mitigation recommendations.
Yang et al. [50] introduce a novel conditioned power outage prediction model (OPM)
that classiﬁes event severity into low, moderate, and high groups. This model utilizes
subsets based on severity as training datasets for power outage predictions. The division,
calculated using the quantile weight distance (QWD) between predicted and extreme
weather phenomena, signiﬁcantly reduces the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE),
ensuring high accuracy in event severity classiﬁcation. In [51], a multifaceted event-based
outage model is proposed to enhance outage forecasting in diverse weather conditions.
The model utilizes the collaborative neural network (CONN) algorithm to transform
sophisticated event-triggered outage challenges, splitting into two continuous differential
subproblems, each with a solitary objective. Experiments afﬁrm the effectiveness of the
CONN event-driven forecasting algorithm in overcoming challenges related to obtaining
extensive and intricate weather events and outage data.
This comprehensive literature review highlights the diverse methodologies and ap-
proaches employed in recent research to improve power outage prediction models. From
machine learning techniques to adaptive strategies and resilience enhancement, these
studies contribute signiﬁcantly to the ﬁeld, emphasizing the importance of accurate out-
age predictions for resilient power systems. It is worth mentioning that, in addition to
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
6 of 29
the reviewed studies, a substantial body of literature addressing the prediction of power
outage durations exists. Various methods have been explored in [52–66] to enrich our
understanding of this critical aspect of power system resilience.
3. Proposed Model
3.1. Model Description
This study presents a machine-learning-based model to predict the power outage
duration (POD) and notify the customers. In this study, a real-world power outage dataset
is utilized from a well-known electric company in Turkey for the ﬁrst time in the literature.
This approach applies an extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) machine learning model on
the mentioned dataset. Also, the feature engineering of the proposed method involves a
feature selection algorithm of maximum relevance minimum redundancy (MRMR), feature
encoding of categorical variables, and feature scaling of numerical variables. Our study is
unique in that it introduces an innovative machine learning solution designed to predict
power outage duration as very short, short, medium, and long for the periods between 0
and 1, 1 and 2, 2 and 4, or more than 4 h, respectively, intending to notify corresponding
customers. Figure 1 demonstrates the overall framework of the presented model.
Based on [67,68], the MRMR algorithm is chosen to select features, which employs an
incremental greedy strategy. The MRMR feature selection method is designed to identify
a subset of features that are most relevant to the target variable while minimizing redun-
dancy among the features themselves. This method maximizes the mutual information
between each feature and the target variable (relevance) and simultaneously minimizes the
mutual information among the selected features (redundancy). The MRMR criterion can be
mathematically expressed as Equation (1):
MRMR = maxS⊆F( 1
|S|∑fi∈S MI( fi, C) −
1
|S|2∑fi,fj∈S MI
 fi, fj
)
(1)
where
•
S ⊆F: All possible subsets S of the feature set F.
•
MI( fi, C): The mutual information between feature f i and the target variable C.
•
|S|: The number of features in subset S.
•
MI
 fi, fj

: The mutual information between features fi and fj.
In predictive modeling, handling categorical variables involves the techniques of
dummy and label encoding. Dummy encoding transforms categorical variables with
multiple levels into a binary matrix, where each level becomes a binary column. This
method is particularly useful when there is no ordinal relationship among the categories.
Furthermore, label encoding assigns a unique numerical label to each category when there
is an inherent order or hierarchy among the categories. On the other hand, for numerical
variables, feature scaling is a crucial step to check that all variables contribute equally
to the model and to prevent the dominance of features with larger scales. A common
method for scaling numerical variables is normalization, where each variable is scaled to a
speciﬁc range, e.g., between 0 and 1. It ensures that the numerical features are on the same
scale, preventing biases that may arise due to differences in measurement units or scales.
Together, these encoding and scaling techniques contribute to the robust preprocessing of
data, facilitating effective training and performance of machine learning approaches.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
7 of 29
 
Figure 1. The proposed model.
In machine learning, datasets are commonly divided into three main subsets: the
training set, validation set, and test set. The training set is used to train the model by
learning patterns and adjusting hyperparameters. The validation set is used during model
development to tune hyperparameters and make decisions about model improvements,
ensuring the model does not overﬁt. The test set is used for the ﬁnal evaluation of the
model’s performance, providing an impartial assessment of completely unseen data. The
70/30 split ratio was chosen according to experiments in the current study, balancing
the need for appropriate training data with the requirement for accurate performance
evaluation. Acceptable ratios such as 80/20 and 90/10 may also be considered, depending
on the dataset size [69]. Randomly shufﬂing the dataset before splitting also helped to
ensure that both sets were representative of the overall data distribution.
The real-world datasets mentioned in the Results section refer to the test datasets to
meticulously evaluate our presented model. These datasets span from 1 February 2023 to
15 May 2023 (late winter to early spring); 1 March 2023 to 1 July 2023 (spring to early
summer); 1 August 2023 to 16 September 2023 (late summer to early fall); and 1 March 2024
to 19 March 2024 (early spring). The overlap in periods (1 February 2023 to 15 May 2023;
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
8 of 29
1 March 2023 to 1 July 2023) was intentional to evaluate the model’s performance across
different seasons, speciﬁcally, winter and spring and spring and summer. The datasets
used are indeed the same; there are no different datasets. This approach allows us to assess
varying power consumption patterns during these transitional periods. It is important
to note that these datasets were not added to the training set. Therefore, the overlapping
periods do not inﬂuence our machine learning model, but serve solely to evaluate its
performance under diverse conditions.
The presented approach explores four machine learning classification algorithms—
decision tree (DT), random forest (RF), k-nearest neighbors (KNN), and extreme gradient
boosting (XGBoost)—by tuning their respective hyperparameters to optimize performance.
Model performance undergoes evaluation using metrics including Accuracy, Recall, Precision,
F1-Score, and Support. Following a thorough assessment, the XGBoost classifier emerges as
the most effective model among the alternatives. This operates as a service, interacting with
the infrastructure of the electric utility to provide accurate predictions based on the input test
query values guided by insights from the company.
To gain deeper insight into the proposed model, Figure 2 illustrates an example of
its architecture. In this integrated model architecture, the synergy between the electric
utility, predictive modeling, notiﬁcation system, and a diverse range of customers fosters
an efﬁcient and proactive approach to power outage management. This predictive model
becomes the linchpin for the seamless ﬂow of information to customers. The electric utility,
armed with the foresight provided by the model, utilizes a robust notiﬁcation system to
disseminate outage duration predictions to a diverse customer base. Residential customers
beneﬁt by receiving timely alerts, enabling them to prepare for potential power interrup-
tions and safeguard their homes. Similarly, businesses, ranging from small enterprises to
large industries, employ this predictive information to make informed decisions about
operational adjustments, backup power deployment, and supply chain management. The
notiﬁcation system’s versatility shines as it delivers outage alerts through multiple channels,
such as SMS, email, and social media, ensuring widespread accessibility. This comprehen-
sive architecture not only empowers customers with the knowledge needed for proactive
planning but also enhances the general resilience and adaptability of the electric utility
confronted with unforeseen events, thereby fostering a more reliable and customer-centric
power distribution system.
Figure 2. The model architecture.
3.2. Model Properties
The presented machine-learning-based model is designed for the classiﬁcation task
of predicting power outages. The intricacies of the model are deﬁned in this section to
emphasize its effectiveness. In classiﬁcation, the model seeks to establish relationships be-
tween independent variables, such as historical outage data, including weather-based and
non-weather-based conditions, and the dependent variable of the power outage duration.
Through a meticulous evaluation process, different machine learning algorithms, including
decision trees, random forests, k-nearest neighbors, and XGBoost, are assessed for their
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
9 of 29
performance using the accuracy metric. Among these algorithms, XGBoost emerged as
the top performer, showcasing superior predictive capabilities. XGBoost, an ensemble
learning algorithm, structures its decision trees sequentially, optimizing their collective
performance. Its advantages lie in its ability to handle numerical and categorical vari-
ables, successfully managing complex datasets while mitigating the risk of overﬁtting.
The main hyperparameters of the XGBoost algorithm, critical in shaping its behavior and
performance, are detailed in Table 1. This includes values for hyperparameters such as
the objective, monotone constraints, learning rate, minimum child weight, the number of
boosting rounds, and maximum depth of trees.
Table 1. Hyperparameters conﬁguration.
Hyperparameters Type
Hyperparameters Value
Objective
“multi:softprob”
Monotone constraints
0
Learning rate
0.3
Minimum child weight
1.0
Maximum depth of trees
6.0
Number of boosting rounds
100
The objective hyperparameter is used to specify the learning task and the corre-
sponding objective function that the algorithm should optimize. In this work, it is set to
“multi:softprob”, indicating a multi-class classiﬁcation task. The XGBoost algorithm uses
the softmax function to calculate probabilities for each class. The softmax function takes
a vector of raw scores and converts them into probabilities. This is especially useful in
multi-class classiﬁcation scenarios, where each class is assigned a probability, and the class
with the greatest possibility is predicted as the ﬁnal output. Also, the monotone constraints
hyperparameter is employed to specify monotonic relations among individual features and
the outcome variable during the training process. When set to 0, it signiﬁes that there are no
speciﬁc monotonic constraints imposed on the corresponding feature. In other words, the
feature is allowed to have any relationship, including positive, negative, or non-monotonic,
with the target variable. Essentially, a value of 0 for monotone constraints indicates that the
associated feature is not constrained to exhibit a speciﬁc monotonic trend concerning the
target, allowing the model to determine the most appropriate relationship during training.
Another critical hyperparameter in the XGBoost algorithm is the learning rate that
inﬂuences the step size of each tree’s contribution to the ﬁnal model during the boosting
process. This hyperparameter determines the tradeoff between training speed and model
accuracy; a higher learning rate can lead to faster convergence but may risk overﬁtting,
while a lower learning rate provides a more stable model but requires more boosting
iterations. Also, the lowest value of the child weight factor speciﬁes the minimum total
of instance weights needed within a child node during the tree building of XGBoost. This
regularization technique helps prevent the creation of overly complex nodes, mitigating
overﬁtting. A higher value increases regularization strength, but ﬁnding the right balance
is crucial to avoid underﬁtting. Moreover, the maximum depth of trees hyperparameter
controls the maximum depth of individual trees in the ensemble, inﬂuencing the XGBoost
model complexity. Higher values allow trees to capture intricate patterns but may lead
to overﬁtting, while lower values constrain complexity to prevent overﬁtting. Another
hyperparameter is the count of boosting rounds to specify the number of boosting rounds
or trees to be built in the ensemble. Each boosting round contributes a new tree to the
model, and the ultimate prediction is the accumulation of predictions from all the trees.
The optimal conﬁguration of hyperparameters can be tuned through different techniques
like grid search and cross-validation regarding the dataset characteristics of the task.
Here, the chosen hyperparameter values are the result of systematic experimentation
aiming to ﬁnd an equilibrium between model intricacy and predictive efﬁcacy. This hy-
perparameter tuning process is conducted using the validation set to ensure an impartial
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
10 of 29
estimate of model performance. The transparency provided by Table 1 ensures the repro-
ducibility of the ﬁndings and serves as a valuable reference for future research and model
reﬁnement. Evaluation of the model based on the accuracy metric reveals its efﬁcacy in
predicting power outage durations. The comprehensive approach, combining advanced
algorithms, feature selection, and data preprocessing, contributes to the robustness of the
model, providing a valuable tool for informing and alerting customers about potential
power disruptions.
We evaluated different machine learning algorithms, including KNN, DT, and RF,
and tuned their hyperparameters to optimize performance. For KNN, the main hyper-
parameters tuned were the number of neighbors (3), weight function (“uniform”), and
an algorithm to ﬁnd the nearest neighbors (“auto”). For DT, the key hyperparameters
included the split quality criterion (“entropy”), splitter strategy (“best”), maximum tree
depth (“none”), and the minimum samples required for splits (2) and leaf nodes (1). The
RF model involved tuning the number of trees (100), split quality criterion (“entropy”),
tree depth (“none”), minimum samples for splits (3) and leaves (2), number of features per
split (“sqrt”), and the use of bootstrap samples (“true”). Hyperparameters for all models
were evaluated with various values to identify the combination that provided the best
performance on the training data. The approach ensured the best setup of each model,
leading to reliable results.
The duration of a power outage relies on various factors, including the type of the
disturbance, geographical location, and the resilience of the power grid. By harnessing
machine learning models to analyze historical outage data, we can enhance our ability
to predict outage durations with a high degree of accuracy. This predictive capability
not only aids in effective outage management but also empowers utility companies to
communicate timely and precise information to consumers as a vital tool. Improved
communication fosters a resilient relationship between service providers and customers,
ensuring transparency and reliability during challenging circumstances. In the present
context, this study aims to implement a predictive model for power outage duration under
diverse inputs such as the power grid elements, urban HV, rural LV, and outage causes.
3.3. Algorithm 1
Algorithm 1 outlines a machine-learning-based model to predict power outage dura-
tions, employing a combination of the XGBoost algorithm and MRMR feature selection.
The algorithm begins by collecting power outage data instances, denoted as N, each charac-
terized by a set of features (F1, F2, . . ., F26). The desired output is the power outage duration,
T, represented as (t1, t2, . . ., tN). The data undergo a comprehensive preprocessing phase,
involving data analysis, feature engineering, and encoding. The MRMR algorithm is ap-
plied to each feature, assessing its importance, and the top-ranking features are selected
for subsequent processing. Categorical data are encoded using one-hot encoding, while
numerical data are standardized through feature scaling. DS, the resultant dataset, is
subsequently divided into sets DS1 and DS2, with a 70/30 ratio.
Following dataset preparation, the XGBoost model is ﬁtted using the training data DS1.
The evaluation phase involves iterating over each instance in DS2 to predict power outage
durations using the trained model. The predictions are categorized into predeﬁned classes:
“VERY SHORT”, “SHORT”, “MEDIUM”, or “LONG”, based on speciﬁc threshold values
(60, 120, and 240, respectively). The algorithm concludes by returning the categorized
outage durations. This comprehensive approach, combining XGBoost and MRMR feature
selection, aims to enhance the accuracy and interpretability of power outage duration
predictions, contributing to the robustness of the proposed model.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
11 of 29
Algorithm 1. The Proposed Model (XGBoost + MRMR)
Model Inputs:
N: Number of power outage instances
F: Features (F1, F2, . . ., F26)
Model Output:
T: Power outage duration (t1, t2, . . ., tN)
Begin:
//Data Collection
for i = 1 to N do
record Data i
//insert power outage data instances
end
//Data Preprocessing
Analyze the Data //Feature Engineering
//Feature Selection
for each feature Fi in Data do
//each feature Fi in Features
score (Fi) = CalculateMRMR (Fi)
//ascertain feature importance with MRMR
end
MS = max (score (Fi))
//select features with high MRMR ranking
1 ≤i ≤m
//Feature Encoding
for each categorical data in MS do
D = get_dummies
//Feature Scaling
for each numerical data in MS do
S = get_standardscalers
DS = joint(D,S)
//obtained dataset after feature engineering
//Dataset Split
(DS1, DS2) = split (DS, ratio = 0.7)
//split dataset into train DS1 (70%) and DS2 (30%) sets
//Model Training
Modelpop = XGB(DS1)
//Model Evaluation
for each di in DS2 do
mi = Modelpop(di)
//attain prediction of power outage duration
MXGB = MXGB U mi
end
//Indexing Predicted Duration
for each MXGB xi do
if xi ≤60 then
Return “VERY SHORT”
elseif xi ≤120 then
Return “SHORT”
elseif xi ≤240 then
Return “MEDIUM”
else
Return “LONG”
end
end
End
3.4. Dataset Description
In the current study, a real-world dataset is utilized for training the predictive model to
forecast the outage duration of power obtained from an electric company in Turkey. It offers
valuable information for analyzing outage patterns and optimizing outage management
systems in the region. The abstract characteristics of the dataset are presented in Table 2,
encompassing 95,454 instances of power outage events with various causes during the
period from 1 January 2022, 00:04:48, to 31 December 2022, 22:50:37. Both regression and
classiﬁcation tasks can make use of this dataset in the ﬁeld of machine learning.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
12 of 29
Table 2. Dataset information.
Dataset Features
Data Types
Relevant Tasks
Field
Instances
Features
Date
Multivariant
Object, Integer, Float
Regression, Classiﬁcation
Power Systems
95,454
26
2022
The variables within the dataset are outlined in Table 3. This dataset comprises
95,454 instances, represented as rows, and 26 features, represented as columns. These
features are as follows: Code Number, Level, Province, District, Power Grid Element,
Power Grid Element Code, Outage Cause Description, Source, Start Date and Time, End
Date and Time, Outage Duration (Numeric), Outage Duration (Categoric), Cause Type,
Notiﬁcation, Urban LV, Urban HV, Suburban LV, Suburban HV, Rural LV, Rural HV, Total
Urban LV, Total Urban HV, Total Suburban LV, Total Suburban HV, Total Rural LV, and
Total Rural HV. In these features, the abbreviations LV and HV stand for low voltage and
high voltage signals, respectively.
Table 3. Dataset variables.
Row
Variable Name
Variable Explanation
Variable Type
1
Code Number
Identiﬁer for each power outage event. Each code is unique. It was
removed during preprocessing.
Numerical
2
Level
Level of the outage. It was removed during preprocessing due to the
uniform value of 1.
Numerical
3
Province
Geographic information about provinces, such as Manisa and Izmir.
Categorical
4
District
Geographic information about districts, such as Urla, Konak, Bergama,
Bornova, Kula, and Soma.
Categorical
5
Power Grid Element
Information about power grid elements, such as ﬁeld distribution box,
subscriber facility, and distribution transformer.
Categorical
6
Power Grid Element Code
Code for the power grid element, utilized after being split for
detailed information.
Categorical
7
Outage Cause Description
Description related to the cause of the outage, such as rain, ﬁre,
earthquake, and transformer maintenance work.
Categorical
8
Source
Source of the outage, such as distribution and transmission.
Categorical
9
Start Date and Time
Start date and time of each outage, such as 11.27.2022 08:47:45.
It was removed during preprocessing.
Timestamp
10
End Date and Time
End date and time of each outage, such as 11.27.2022 09:20:00. It was
removed during preprocessing.
Timestamp
11
Outage Duration (Numeric)
Duration of power outage in hours; for example, 0.55 refers to 33 min. It
is the difference between the “Start Date and Time” and “End Date and
Time” features. It was removed during preprocessing.
Numerical
12
Outage Duration (Categoric)
Duration of power outage, performed discretization while preprocessing
into categories, such as very short (0–1 h), short (1–2 h), medium (2–4 h),
and long (more than 4 h), based on the “Outage Duration (Numeric)”
feature. This feature was selected as the target.
Categorical
13
Cause Type
The main reason for the outage event, such as external factors, security
concerns, or operator-related issues.
Categorical
14
Notiﬁcation
Status of the outage, whether with or without notiﬁcation.
Categorical
15
Urban LV
Low voltage level in the urban area in the power outage event.
Numerical
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
13 of 29
Table 3. Cont.
Row
Variable Name
Variable Explanation
Variable Type
16
Urban HV
High voltage level in the urban area in the power outage event.
Numerical
17
Suburban LV
Low voltage level in the suburban area in the power outage event.
Numerical
18
Suburban HV
High voltage level in the suburban area in the power outage event.
Numerical
19
Rural LV
Low voltage level in the rural area in the power outage event.
Numerical
20
Rural HV
High voltage level in the rural area in the power outage event.
Numerical
21
Total Urban LV
Total amount of low voltage level in the urban area in the power
outage event.
Numerical
22
Total Urban HV
Total amount of high voltage level in the urban area in the power
outage event.
Numerical
23
Total Suburban LV
Total amount of low voltage level in the suburban area in the power
outage event.
Numerical
24
Total Suburban HV
Total amount of high voltage level in the suburban area in the power
outage event.
Numerical
25
Total Rural LV
Total amount of low voltage level in the rural area in the power
outage event.
Numerical
26
Total Rural HV
Total amount of high voltage level in the rural area in the power
outage event.
Numerical
For further description, in the power outage dataset, the unique and uninformative
nature of the Code Number feature led to its removal. Similarly, the uniformity of the
Level feature, with the value of 1 for all instances, made it non-contributory, so it was
excluded. Additionally, the temporal features, including “Start Date and Time”, “End Date
and Time”, and “Outage Duration (Numeric)” were removed, as they were used to derive
the “Outage Duration (Categoric)” feature. This strategic elimination aimed to ensure a
non-trivial task and enhance the dataset’s clarity, emphasizing pertinent information for
subsequent analyses, particularly focusing on predicting the “Outage Duration (Categoric)”
as the target feature. The reﬁned dataset ensures that the model focuses on meaningful
variables, facilitating more accurate insights into power outage patterns. Table 4 exhibits
the statistical attributes of continuous features in the dataset, encompassing minimum
(min), maximum (max), mode, mean, and standard deviation (SD).
Table 4. Statistical attributes of continuous variables in the dataset.
Variable Name
Min
Max
Mode
Mean
SD
Outage Duration (Numeric)
0.0003
170.7217
0.0111
2.4153
2.2736
Urban LV
0.0000
1984.0000
0.0000
10.8174
47.8706
Urban HV
0.0000
78,711.0000
0.0000
477.3364
2161.3012
Suburban LV
0.0000
750.0000
0.0000
1.8341
16.1757
Suburban HV
0.0000
26,742.0000
0.0000
74.9930
640.5180
Rural LV
0.0000
800.0000
0.0000
3.2682
20.7670
Rural HV
0.0000
13,698.0000
0.0000
71.3874
434.2675
Total Urban LV
0.0000
9021.3900
0.0000
16.9404
126.0593
Total Urban HV
0.0000
383,182.7572
0.0000
761.4465
4895.6947
Total Suburban LV
0.0000
3059.5644
0.0000
2.4968
33.9616
Total Suburban HV
0.0000
144,658.0725
0.0000
109.0963
1397.3997
Total Rural LV
0.0000
5185.7333
0.0000
5.0012
53.2843
Total Rural HV
0.0000
97,378.7967
0.0000
109.1477
1092.3362
The dataset underwent rigorous cleaning and preprocessing, including the removal
of null values, scaling of features, and encoding of categorical variables using dummies.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
14 of 29
Additionally, timestamps were standardized, and anomalies in the dataset were identiﬁed
through a robust approach utilizing statistical methods, visualization tools, and domain-
speciﬁc knowledge. A custom function was developed to identify anomalies within the
outage duration data. This function systematically detected outliers by calculating standard
deviations and means of the data, setting upper and lower limits based on these statistics,
and iteratively identifying data points falling beyond these limits. Strategies such as
outlier detection and handling were implemented to ensure data quality and maintain
data integrity. With the dataset prepared, it was ready for advanced analyses, including
feature engineering and machine learning modeling. The dataset provides a comprehensive
view of electric power outages in a province of Turkey during 2022, making it a beneﬁcial
asset for comprehending outage patterns and optimizing outage management within the
region. For a comprehensive understanding of the dataset’s collection process, it is crucial
to highlight the role of various sensors in gathering real-time data on electric power outages,
thereby enriching the dataset with accurate information.
From the perspective of the electric utility structure, the outage management system
(OMS) integrates with the automatic meter reading system (AMRS), supervisory control
and data acquisition (SCADA), customer relationship management (CRM), enterprise
asset management (EAM), and geographic information system (GIS). GIS is utilized for
transferring location and inventory details within the Gdz region. Data from meters and
sensors, such as transformer-bar meters and environmental sensors in the Gdz region,
is transmitted to the OMS via AMRS integration. If transformer meters and sensors are
involved in energy ﬂow at the same interruption point, a power outage is signaled within a
speciﬁed timeframe. As deﬁned by the rule set, an interruption is then automatically created
in the OMS. Breakers in the ﬁeld can be controlled not only by ﬁeld personnel but also by
SCADA. It translates the open–closed status of breakers into machine language, represented
as 0 and 1 based on operations performed. Opening–closing data are transmitted to the
OMS via integration following SCADA operations and automatically create interruptions
within predeﬁned scenarios in Gdz. If the current value in the Türkiye Elektrik ˙Iletim A.¸S.
(TE˙IA¸S) feeders or transformers drops below 3 A, an interruption is automatically created
in the OMS. In addition, if the information requested in calls transmitted by the CRM is
correct and complete (e.g., including building numbers), and also there are three or more
calls on the same power ﬂow, an automatic interruption occurs at the relevant point.
4. Experimental Studies
4.1. Experiments
In this part, we present the experimental studies conducted to rigorously inspect
and compare the proﬁciency of various machine learning algorithms on our dataset. To
reach this goal, we conducted four experiments to offer a comprehensive analysis of
the presented model. The selection process of the machine learning algorithm involved
exhaustive assessing of the decision tree (DT), random forest (RF), k-nearest neighbors
(KNN), and the chosen algorithm, extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost). This thorough
investigation not only involves a meticulous examination of the experimental methodology
but also includes analyzing the underlying principles of each algorithm by tuning the
related hyperparameters.
The presented model is implemented using the Python 3.12.1 language in Jupyter
Notebook v7.0.6, accessible from the Anaconda computer program. The choice of this plat-
form provides distinct advantages to developing machine-learning-based models through
various data science packages. Python, with its versatility and extensive libraries, combined
with the interactive environment of Jupyter Notebook, contributes to the efﬁciency of data
analysis and model development.
The chosen machine learning algorithms—decision tree (DT), random forest (RF),
k-nearest neighbors (KNN), and extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost), and the evaluation
metrics Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F1-Score, Support, Macro Avg, Weighted Avg, and
Confusion Matrix, are regarded in the subsequent sections of this study. Next, we present
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
15 of 29
the results obtained from our experiments, followed by a comparative assessment that aims
to highlight the superiority of our chosen approach.
4.1.1. Machine Learning Algorithms
The performance of the following machine learning classiﬁcation algorithms is evalu-
ated on the presented power system dataset:
K-nearest neighbors (KNN): This is a rudimentary, instance-based learning algorithm
applied for regression and classiﬁcation tasks. It is one of the most basic yet widely
employed classiﬁers, known for its versatility. In this algorithm, the classiﬁcation of a
data point is determined by the predominant class among its k-nearest neighbors in the
feature space, not assuming the underlying data distribution. The k in this algorithm is
a crucial hyperparameter inﬂuencing model performance, and it determines the number
of neighbors considered. Despite its computational inexpensiveness in training, KNN can
become computationally intensive during prediction, particularly with large datasets. It is
widely utilized in various applications for its ability to identify and group data with similar
characteristics [70].
Decision tree (DT): These are hierarchical structures that recursively split the dataset
based on the most signiﬁcant feature at each node, with splits determined by maximizing
information gain or minimizing impurity. This treelike structure represents decision paths,
utilizing inference and trimming processes. In the inference step, the tree structure is
constructed, while trimming mitigates complications. Inputs are connected to outputs by
traversing through various branches of the tree. Decision trees, being easy to interpret
and visualize, are powerful classiﬁers known for their simplicity and commendable per-
formance. However, they are susceptible to overﬁtting, especially in complex trees with
numerous branches and conditions, hindering effective generalization to new inputs. To
address this, boosting, bagging, and regularization approaches are commonly utilized to
mitigate overﬁtting issues [71].
Random forest (RF): This classiﬁer distinguishes itself by employing multiple decision
trees instead of a single one. It is an ensemble learning method that generates several
decision trees in the course of the training phase, producing the most frequent class for
classiﬁcation or the average prediction for the regression task, calculated from the single
trees. This technique introduces randomness by utilizing a subset of features for each tree
and aggregating their predictions. This ensemble approach is particularly advantageous,
as it effectively reduces overﬁtting, enhancing the generalization capability of the model.
Random forests are preferred over decision trees in various applications due to their
improved accuracy and ability to overcome overﬁtting. Nevertheless, the implementation
of this technique can be challenging due to its intricate structure, and it may not be the
optimal choice for real-time predictions because of its relatively slower processing speed
compared with other machine-learning models [72].
Extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost): As a highly acclaimed algorithm, this is
renowned for its speed, performance, and versatility. It employs a gradient boosting
procedure, building trees sequentially to correct errors and optimize predictive accuracy.
The framework of the algorithm incorporates regularization techniques, enabling con-
trol over model complexity and addressing overﬁtting concerns through regularization
terms. With robust parallelization, XGBoost capitalizes on multiple cores for efﬁcient
training. It adeptly handles missing values and supports built-in cross-validation, facilitat-
ing model evaluation and hyperparameter tuning. Also, XGBoost offers ﬂexibility, with
custom-deﬁned objective functions, and features early stopping to prevent overﬁtting. Its
comprehensive set of capabilities contributes to its widespread adoption as a powerful
algorithm in machine learning applications [73].
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
16 of 29
As a mathematical proof, the objective function and regularization expressions of the
XGBoost algorithm are presented in Equations (2) and (3), respectively.
L(α) =
n
∑
i=1
l(yi, ˆyi) +
K
∑
k=1
Ω( fk)
(2)
where
•
α: Model hyperparameter.
•
n: Training examples count.
•
yi: True label for the ith example.
•
ˆyi: Predicted label for the ith example.
•
l(yi, ˆyi): Loss function quantifying the prediction error.
•
K: Number of leaves in the model.
•
fk: Score of the kth leaf in the tree.
•
Ω( fk): Regularization term to limit model complexity to prevent overﬁtting.
Ω( fk) = γT + 1
2⅄∥w∥2
2
(3)
where
•
T: Leaves count in the tree.
•
γ: Regularization hyperparameter for the number of leaves.
•
⅄: Regularization hyperparameter for the weights.
•
w: Weights associated with the leaves.
4.1.2. Evaluation Metrics
In this study, various types of evaluation metrics, including Accuracy, F1-Score, Preci-
sion, Recall, Support, Macro Avg and Weighted Avg for F1-Score, Precision, Recall, Support,
and Confusion Matrix are utilized to assess the functionality of the presented method for
power outage duration prediction. The expressions of these metrics are shown in Table 5.
Here, the terms TP, FP, TN, and FN denote the true positive, false positive, true negative,
and false negative, respectively. These are widely applied in evaluating the conduct of clas-
siﬁcation problems and represent different outcomes of forecasts produced by a machine
learning model compared with the actual ground truth, in which the TP and TN instances
demonstrate where the model accurately estimates the positive and negative classes, re-
spectively. Also, the FP and FN instances determine where the model falsely identiﬁes the
positive class as a Type I error and the negative class as a Type II error, respectively.
In Table 5, Accuracy is the proportion of correctly predicted instances to the total
instances, which affords an overall model correctness measure. F1-Score is the harmonic or
reciprocal mean of recall and precision, which is advantageous when there is an uneven
class distribution, as it addresses both false positives and false negatives scoring between 0
and 1; higher values denote greater accuracy in predictions to underscore the effectiveness
of the decision boundaries. Precision is the proportion of true positives to the total of
true positives and false positives to measure the accuracy of the positive predictions made
by the model. Recall is the proportion of true positives to the total of true positives and
false negatives to measure the ability of a model to capture all the positive instances in the
dataset. Support is directly related to the number of instances of each class contributing to
understanding the distribution of classes and can be used in conjunction with other metrics
to assess model performance.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
17 of 29
Table 5. Model evaluation metrics.
Metric
Expression
Accuracy
(TP + TN)/(TP + TN + FP + FN)
F1-Score
(2TP)/(2TP + FP + FN)
Precision
TP/(TP + FP)
Recall
TP/(TP + FN)
Support
TP + FN
Macro Avg F1-Score
n
∑
i=1
(F1-Scorei)/n
Macro Avg Precision
n
∑
i=1
(Precisioni)/n
Macro Avg Recall
n
∑
i=1
(Recalli)/n
Weighted Avg F1-Score
n
∑
i=1
 Supporti × F1 −Scorei

/
n
∑
i=1
Supporti
Weighted Avg Precision
n
∑
i=1
 Supporti × Precisioni

/
n
∑
i=1
Supporti
Weighted Avg Recall
n
∑
i=1
(Supporti × Recalli)/
n
∑
i=1
Supporti
Moreover, Macro Avg (Macro Average) is a method to calculate the average perfor-
mance over multiple classes in a classiﬁcation task. It calculates the metric of interest, such
as F1-Score, Recall, and Precision, autonomously for every class and thereafter takes the
average across all classes. In these calculations, n is the number of classes, and F1-Scorei,
Precisioni, and Recalli represent the mentioned metrics for class i. The Macro Avg treats
all classes equally and is notably advantageous when there is a class imbalance, as it gives
each class the same weight in the average, regardless of its size. Similarly, the Weighted
Avg (Weighted Average) is another alternative to calculate the average performance over
multiple classes in the classiﬁcation task, where the contribution of every class to the
average is weighted by the number of instances in that class. The Support metric for each
class is denoted as Supporti and indicates the count of instances belonging to class i.
The Confusion Matrix is a table employed in statistics and machine learning contexts to
assess the effectiveness of a classiﬁcation model. It summarizes the results of a classiﬁcation
task, examining the predicted and actual outputs into four categories, namely TP, FP, TN,
and FN as the terms of true positive, false positive, true negative, and false negative,
respectively, shown in Table 6 [74].
Table 6. Description of the Confusion Matrix.
Predicted Values
Actual
Values
Positive
Negative
Positive
True positive (TP)
False negative (FN)
Negative
False positive (FP)
True negative (TN)
4.2. Results
Various machine learning models based on evaluation metrics, namely, Accuracy,
Precision, Recall, F1-Score, Support, Macro Avg and Weighted Avg for Precision, Recall,
F1-Score, and Support, are conﬁrmed. Through Table 7, the results of the experiments are
presented in the Accuracy metric for the current study over 30% of the described dataset
in Section 3.4 to evaluate the models. According to the obtained results, the importance
of selecting XGBoost as the most appropriate classiﬁcation model with a high accuracy of
98.433% is underscored for its optimal performance in handling diverse duration classes of
power outage prediction in this study. The results show that the extreme gradient boosting
(XGBoost) algorithm outperformed the other machine learning algorithms, including
decision tree (DT), random forest (RF), and k-nearest neighbors (KNN), to predict the
duration of power outages as very short, short, medium, and long classiﬁcations for time
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
18 of 29
periods between 0 and 1, 1 and 2, 2 and 4, or more than 4 h, respectively, with the aim of
notifying corresponding customers for a city in Turkey.
Table 7. Comparison of the trained models for power outage durations.
Trained Model
Accuracy
Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost)
98.433%
Decision Tree (DT)
95.620%
Random Forest (RF)
81.452%
K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN)
67.256%
The evaluation results of four classiﬁcation models—XGBoost, decision tree (DT),
random forest (RF), and k-nearest neighbors (KNN)—reveal varying performances for
the prediction of different power outage durations, shown in Tables 8–11. The XGBoost
model displayed superior accuracy of 98.433% and consistency in Precision, Recall, and
F1-Score, achieving the average value of 98.466%, 98.435%, and 98.449%. Random forest
demonstrated reasonable overall performance in the mentioned metrics, ranging from
80.978% to 81.940%, resulting in an accuracy of 81.452%. K-nearest neighbors exhibited
mixed performance, with Precision, Recall, and F1-Score values ranging from 66.235% to
69.160% and an accuracy of 67.256%. The decision tree showed results between 95.602%
and 95.615% for the regarded metrics, with an accuracy of 95.620%.
Table 8. Results of the XGBoost classiﬁcation model in different evaluation metrics.
Durations
Evaluation Metrics
Precision (%)
Recall (%)
F1-Score (%)
Support
Very Short
99.379
98.582
98.979
8601
Short
97.555
98.295
97.923
7916
Medium
97.790
98.351
98.070
6974
Long
99.139
98.514
98.825
4911
Macro Avg
98.466
98.435
98.449
28,402
Weighted Avg
98.439
98.433
98.435
28,402
Accuracy
98.433%
28,402
Table 9. Results of the DT classiﬁcation model in different evaluation metrics.
Durations
Evaluation Metrics
Precision (%)
Recall (%)
F1-Score (%)
Support
Very Short
97.538
97.186
97.362
8601
Short
94.186
94.745
94.464
7916
Medium
94.386
94.264
94.352
6974
Long
96.350
96.213
96.281
4911
Macro Avg
95.615
95.602
95.608
28,402
Weighted Avg
95.624
95.620
95.622
28,402
Accuracy
95.620%
28,402
To visually demonstrate the performance of the trained models, Figure 3 represents a
chart based on the F1-Score metric through Tables 8–11. This chart highlights the compara-
tive effectiveness of each model, complementing the accuracy results in Table 7.
Additionally, comprehensive insights into the performances of the classiﬁcation mod-
els are illustrated through the Confusion Matrices in Tables 12–15, providing a detailed
breakdown of classiﬁcations for each model across different durations. By incorporating
these tables, a more nuanced understanding of the models’ abilities is achievable to cor-
rectly classify instances and mitigate errors, offering a thorough evaluation of their overall
efﬁcacy in handling the various duration categories. The elements along the diagonal in
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
19 of 29
the Confusion Matrix represent the instances where the actual and predicted classes match,
indicating correct predictions. In the context of the XGBoost Confusion Matrix, the diagonal
elements are the highest values, signifying the maximum number of correct predictions,
while off-diagonal elements are the minimum number of incorrect predictions compared
with other matrices of models.
Table 10. Results of the RF classiﬁcation model in different evaluation metrics.
Durations
Evaluation Metrics
Precision (%)
Recall (%)
F1-Score (%)
Support
Very Short
89.794
88.583
89.184
8601
Short
75.272
78.676
76.936
7916
Medium
74.719
77.258
75.968
6974
Long
87.974
79.393
83.464
4911
Macro Avg
81.940
80.978
81.388
28,402
Weighted Avg
81.730
81.452
81.536
28,402
Accuracy
81.452%
28,402
Table 11. Results of the KNN classiﬁcation model in different evaluation metrics.
Durations
Evaluation Metrics
Precision (%)
Recall (%)
F1-Score (%)
Support
Very Short
81.962
78.665
80.280
8601
Short
56.374
66.865
61.173
7916
Medium
56.929
57.141
57.034
6974
Long
81.373
62.268
70.550
4911
Macro Avg
69.160
66.235
67.259
28,402
Weighted Avg
68.582
67.256
67.564
28,402
Accuracy
67.256%
28,402
Figure 3. Comparison of the trained models in the F1-Score metric.
Table 12. Confusion Matrix for the performance of the XGBoost classiﬁcation model.
Predicted Instances
Actual
Instances
Very Short
Short
Medium
Long
Very Short
8479
122
0
0
Short
52
7781
83
0
Medium
1
72
6859
42
Long
0
1
72
4838
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
20 of 29
Table 13. Confusion Matrix for the performance of the DT classiﬁcation model.
Predicted Instances
Actual
Instances
Very Short
Short
Medium
Long
Very Short
8359
239
2
1
Short
202
7500
210
4
Medium
7
219
6574
174
Long
2
5
179
4725
Table 14. Confusion Matrix for the performance of the RF classiﬁcation model.
Predicted Instances
Actual
Instances
Very Short
Short
Medium
Long
Very Short
7619
882
95
5
Short
749
6228
869
70
Medium
94
1034
5388
458
Long
23
130
859
3899
Table 15. Confusion Matrix for the performance of the KNN classiﬁcation model.
Predicted Instances
Actual
Instances
Very Short
Short
Medium
Long
Very Short
6766
1562
257
16
Short
1128
5293
1412
83
Medium
287
2101
3985
601
Long
74
433
1346
3058
In the testing process, the XGBoost model’s accuracy was rigorously assessed using
real-world test datasets provided by the power utility, spanning four distinct date ranges:
from 1 February 2023 to 15 May 2023; 1 March 2023 to 1 July 2023; 1 August 2023 to
16 September 2023; and 1 March 2024, to 19 March 2024, including 24,230; 29,873; 13,057;
and 3743 instances, respectively, represented in Tables 16–19 through the assessment criteria
of Accuracy, F1-Score, Precision, Recall, Support, Macro Avgs, and Weighted Avgs and in
Tables 20–23 as Confusion Matrices. In Tables 16–19, the model consistently demonstrated
high accuracies of 97.660%, 97.687%, 97.664%, and 97.542% across all these varied periods,
respectively. In addition, all the results of the Precision, Recall, and F1-Score metrics
are impressively greater than 95.678, 96.602, and 96.21, respectively, in these tables. In
Tables 20–23, the predicted true positive, false negative, false positive, and true negative
values are demonstrated for each class label. High diagonal elements of the matrices
(e.g., 7889; 6042; 5509; and 4223 in Table 20) for each class, with low off-diagonal elements
(e.g., 0, 61, 62, and 109 in Table 20), extremely conﬁrmed the high performance of the model.
Also, the trained model usually had no trouble in classifying all types of durations based on
Tables 20–23. For instance, 4734 out of the 4822 long class were predicted accurately; only
88 of them are misclassiﬁed by the presented model in Table 21. This series of evaluations
reinforces the model’s robust performance and emphasizes its reliability in predicting
outage durations, showcasing its effectiveness and applicability for practical deployment
within the power utility domain.
Certain features carry greater signiﬁcance in the dataset than others. The current work
employed the MRMR feature selection algorithm to cross-verify results and conﬁrm the
resilience of the chosen feature sets, demonstrating which features can inﬂuence the predic-
tion of power outage durations more in the power management process. The outcomes
are presented in Table 24, illustrating the weight scores attained through the MRMR algo-
rithm to assess the signiﬁcance of each predictor. A higher weight score suggests greater
signiﬁcance of the associated predictor. The verbosity level factor of MRMR, controlling
diagnostic facts, was conﬁgured to zero. The MRMR algorithm can effectively identify
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
21 of 29
features inﬂuencing the prediction of the target. Under this algorithm, features such as
“Total Urban HV”, “Cause Type”, “Total Rural LV”, “Total Urban LV”, and “Notiﬁcation”
have substantial impacts on the prediction, with weight scores of 0.5631, 0.4140, 0.0165,
0.0151, and 0.0102, respectively. Furthermore, the MRMR algorithm indicates that features
like “Power Grid Element Code”, “District”, and “Province” exhibit lower correlation with
the output variables compared with other features, through the weight scores of 0.0009,
0.0008, and 0.0004, respectively.
Table 16. Results of the XGBoost model for the 1 February 2023 to 15 May 2023 test dataset.
Durations
Evaluation Metrics
Precision (%)
Recall (%)
F1-Score (%)
Support
Very Short
99.220
98.293
98.754
8026
Short
96.088
97.107
96.595
6222
Medium
96.531
97.007
96.768
5679
Long
98.576
98.141
98.358
4303
Macro Avg
97.604
97.637
97.619
24,230
Weighted Avg
97.671
97.660
97.664
24,230
Accuracy
97.660%
24,230
Table 17. Results of the XGBoost model for the 1 March 2023 to 1 July 2023 test dataset.
Durations
Evaluation Metrics
Precision (%)
Recall (%)
F1-Score (%)
Support
Very Short
99.234
98.389
98.810
10,800
Short
96.103
97.013
96.556
7600
Medium
96.513
96.963
96.737
6651
Long
98.400
98.175
98.287
4822
Macro Avg
97.562
97.635
97.598
29,873
Weighted Avg
97.697
97.687
97.691
29,873
Accuracy
97.687%
29,873
Table 18. Results of the XGBoost model for the 1 August 2023 to 16 September 2023 test dataset.
Durations
Evaluation Metrics
Precision (%)
Recall (%)
F1-Score (%)
Support
Very Short
99.360
98.631
98.994
5040
Short
95.919
96.602
96.259
3090
Medium
95.808
96.849
96.326
2761
Long
98.652
97.969
98.309
2166
Macro Avg
97.435
97.513
97.472
13,057
Weighted Avg
97.677
97.664
97.669
13,057
Accuracy
97.664%
13,057
Table 19. Results of the XGBoost model for the 1 March 2024 to 19 March 2024 test dataset.
Durations
Evaluation Metrics
Precision (%)
Recall (%)
F1-Score (%)
Support
Very Short
98.943
97.516
98.224
1248
Short
95.678
96.748
96.210
984
Medium
96.753
98.026
97.386
912
Long
98.990
98.164
98.575
599
Macro Avg
97.591
97.613
97.599
3743
Weighted Avg
97.559
97.542
97.547
3743
Accuracy
97.542
3743
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
22 of 29
Table 20. Confusion Matrix of the XGBoost model for the 1 February 2023 to 15 May 2023 test dataset.
Predicted Instances
Actual
Instances
Very Short
Short
Medium
Long
Very Short
7889
137
0
0
Short
62
6042
118
0
Medium
0
109
5509
61
Long
0
0
80
4223
Table 21. Confusion Matrix of the XGBoost model for the 1 March 2023 to 1 July 2023 test dataset.
Predicted Instances
Actual
Instances
Very Short
Short
Medium
Long
Very Short
10,626
174
0
0
Short
82
7373
145
0
Medium
0
125
6449
77
Long
0
0
88
4734
Table 22. Confusion Matrix for the XGBoost model for the 1 August 2023 to 16 September 2023
test dataset.
Predicted Instances
Actual
Instances
Very Short
Short
Medium
Long
Very Short
4971
69
0
0
Short
32
2985
73
0
Medium
0
58
2674
29
Long
0
0
44
2122
Table 23. Confusion Matrix for the XGBoost model for the 1 March 2024 to 19 March 2024 test dataset.
Predicted Instances
Actual
Instances
Very Short
Short
Medium
Long
Very Short
1217
31
0
0
Short
13
952
19
0
Medium
0
12
894
6
Long
0
0
11
588
Table 24. Ranks of dataset features in MRMR algorithm.
Rank
Feature
MRMR Weight Score
1
Total Urban HV
0.5631
2
Cause Type
0.4140
3
Total Rural LV
0.0165
4
Total Urban LV
0.0151
5
Notiﬁcation
0.0102
6
Total Suburban LV
0.0082
7
Total Suburban HV
0.0076
8
Outage Cause Description
0.0065
9
Total Rural HV
0.0050
10
Source
0.0028
11
Power Grid Element
0.0022
12
Urban LV
0.0022
13
Rural LV
0.0021
14
Suburban LV
0.0020
15
Urban HV
0.0016
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
23 of 29
Table 24. Cont.
Rank
Feature
MRMR Weight Score
16
Rural HV
0.0015
17
Suburban HV
0.0011
18
Power Grid Element Code
0.0009
19
District
0.0008
20
Province
0.0004
4.3. Comparisons
In this work, a complete comparative analysis of our power outage duration (POD)
prediction model is conducted in Table 25 against various state-of-the-art techniques [75–77]
employed in the literature for 30 classiﬁcation tasks, similarly. Our evaluation encompassed
various predictions, considering machine learning models such as random forest (RF),
adaptive similar day (ASD), the combination of RF and ASD, support vector machines
(SVM), and artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN), with different conﬁgurations relying on
the evaluation metric of Accuracy over various datasets. Worthy of attention, there are
various types of regression-based and statistical methods [14,34,45,54,57,78–81] in the
literature for power outage duration predictions with different evaluation metrics, such
as MSE, MAE, MAPE, and RMSE, that are inappropriate to be compared with the current
classiﬁcation task.
Table 25. Comparison of the proposed method with state-of-the-art methods on different datasets.
Reference
Year
Method
Accuracy (%)
Mbuya
et al. [73]
2022
Random forest (RF) for 15 min. duration ahead
92.400
Adaptive similar day (ASD) for 15 min. duration ahead
90.600
RF–ASD for 15 min. duration ahead
90.200
Random forest (RF) for 1 h. duration ahead
88.400
Adaptive similar day (ASD) for 1 h. duration ahead
87.300
RF–ASD for 1 h. duration ahead
86.800
Random forest (RF) for 24 h. duration ahead
62.000
Adaptive similar day (ASD) for 24 h. duration ahead
85.000
RF–ASD for 24 h. duration ahead
60.900
Taimoor
et al. [76]
2020
SVM cost = 32, gamma = 0.02041
92.500
SVM cost = 256, gamma = 0.02
93.434
SVM cost = 16, gamma = 0.02273
90.000
ANN size of hidden layer = 8, rate of learning = 0.01
90.083
ANN size of hidden layer = 6, rate of learning = 0.01
91.919
ANN size of hidden layer = 14, rate of learning = 0.01
84.286
Eskandarpour et al.
[77]
2017
Linear support vector machine (LSVM)
84.700
Quadratic support vector machine SVM (QSVM)
86.300
Cubic support vector machine SVM (CSVM)
86.100
Gaussian support vector machine SVM (GSVM)
86.400
Logistic regression (LR)
80.900
Average
85.511
Our Proposed
Method
Extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) + minimum redundancy
maximum relevance (MRMR)
98.433
The results demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method, revealing a substan-
tial performance improvement of 12.922% across the Accuracy metric when compared with
the benchmarks, with an average accuracy of 85.511%. In contrast, our method achieved
outstanding results, with 98.433% Accuracy, 98.466% Precision, 98.435% Recall, and 98.449%
F1-Score. These ﬁndings underscore the effectiveness of our approach, positioning it as
a robust and reliable solution for accurately predicting power outage durations across
various time durations, namely very short, short, medium, and long.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
24 of 29
The comparison of our proposed method with various machine learning models is
presented in Table 25. To statistically evaluate the differences in performance among these
models, we conducted the Friedman test. The Friedman test is a non-parametric statistical
test used to detect differences in treatments across multiple test attempts and is particularly
useful when the same subjects are used for each treatment. It ranks the performance of each
algorithm and assesses whether the observed differences in performance are statistically
signiﬁcant. The Friedman test yielded a p-value of 0.000007744, indicating a statistically
signiﬁcant difference in the performance of the models at a signiﬁcance level of 0.05.
Therefore, the null hypothesis that there is no difference in the performance of these models
is rejected. As a mathematical proof of our ﬁndings, we demonstrate that the observed
p-value is far below the conventional threshold of 0.05, providing strong evidence that the
performance differences are not due to random chance. Given these results, we selected
the extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) model for its superior accuracy and statistically
signiﬁcant performance advantage over the other models tested.
5. Conclusions and Future Works
Power outages are a persistent challenge for electric utilities, affecting millions of
customers annually and resulting in signiﬁcant economic losses. Accurate prediction of
power outage duration and timely notiﬁcations sent to customers are crucial aspects of
effective outage management to enhance the overall grid resilience and improve customer
communication. To reach this goal, we proposed a novel machine-learning-based model
for predicting power outage durations (PODs) with an impressive accuracy of 98.433%,
outperforming state-of-the-art counterparts with an average accuracy of 85.511%, and
then with 12.922% improvement. This classiﬁcation model leverages the extreme gradient
boosting (XGBoost) algorithm over a real-world dataset provided by an electric company
in Turkey to make predictions of power outage durations and notify related customers. Fur-
thermore, the importance scores of dataset features are achieved by utilizing the maximum
relevance minimum redundancy (MRMR) algorithm in our comprehensive experiments.
Under this algorithm, features such as “Total Urban HV”, “Cause Type”, “Total Rural LV”,
“Total Urban LV”, and “Notiﬁcation” have substantial impacts on the prediction, with
weight scores of 0.5631, 0.4140, 0.0165, 0.0151, and 0.0102, respectively. Furthermore, the
MRMR algorithm indicates that features like “Power Grid Element Code”, “District”, and
“Province” exhibit lower correlations with the output variable compared with other features
through weight scores of 0.0009, 0.0008, and 0.0004, respectively. Based on the ﬁndings, the
high accuracy of the presented model is pivotal for electric utilities to streamline outage
management and enhance communication with related customers, ultimately improving
grid resilience and reliability. Consequently, the current method offers the potential to
revolutionize outage management in the electric power industry.
For future works, expanding the application of the power outage duration predic-
tion model to transformers equipped with diverse sensors and environmental data hold
promising implications for enhancing power distribution systems. By integrating real-time
sensor information, the model can contribute to predictive maintenance strategies, fore-
casting potential transformer issues based on environmental conditions and operational
factors. This proactive approach enables utilities to schedule timely maintenance, pre-
venting unexpected failures and improving overall system reliability. Furthermore, such
environmental data allows a comprehensive assessment of external factors inﬂuencing
power outage duration predictions. The model can leverage sensor inputs measuring
temperature, humidity, pollution levels, and more to gauge the effect of these conditions
on the functionality of sensor-equipped transformers during outage events. Additionally,
the presented method can be applied to diverse power outage datasets, accommodating
various feature engineering methodologies adapted to their speciﬁc characteristics, such as
size and types of features. Such a predictive model offers a holistic solution for resilient
power distribution, supporting informed decision making and predictive maintenance in
the evolving landscape of smart grid technologies.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
25 of 29
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, B.G., R.A.K. and R.Y.; methodology, B.G.; software, B.G.
and T.K.; validation, B.G., Y.A.A. and T.E.G.; formal analysis, B.G. and R.A.K.; investigation, B.G.,
R.A.K., R.Y. and D.B.; resources, B.G., T.K., Y.A.A. and T.E.G.; data curation, Y.A.A. and T.E.G.;
writing—original draft preparation, B.G; writing—review and editing, B.G. and D.B.; visualization,
B.G. and T.K.; supervision, R.A.K. and R.Y.; project administration, R.A.K., R.Y., T.K., Y.A.A. and
T.E.G.; funding acquisition, Y.A.A. and T.E.G. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: The authors declare that this study received funding from the Gdz Electricity Distribution
Company. The funder had the following involvement with the study: design, data collection, analysis,
interpretation of data, and the decision to submit it for publication.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding author due to privacy restriction.
Acknowledgments: We would like to express our sincere gratitude to Gdz Electricity Distribution,
Corporate ofﬁce in ˙Izmir, Turkey, for generously providing the datasets used in this study. Their
cooperation and support have been invaluable throughout the course of our research. Addition-
ally, we extend our appreciation to all those who contributed to this project in various capacities,
including administrative and technical support. This work would not have been possible without
their assistance.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.
Abbreviations
The current paper uses following abbreviations.
AI
Artiﬁcial intelligence
AMRS
Automatic meter-reading system
ANDD
Adaptive nested dynamic downscaling
ANN
Artiﬁcial neural network
ANOVA
Analysis of variance
ASD
Adaptive similar day
CONN
Collaborative neural network
CRM
Customer relationship management
CSVM
Cubic support vector machine
DNN
Deep neural network
DT
Decision tree
EAM
Enterprise asset management
ES
Exponential smoothing
ET
Extra tree
GBDT
Gradient-boosting decision tree
GIS
Geographic information system
GLM
Generalized linear model
GSVM
Gaussian support vector machine
KNN
K-nearest neighbors
LR
Logistic regression
LSVM
Linear support vector machine
MAPE
Mean absolute percentage error
ML
Machine learning
MLR
Multiple linear regression
MRMR
Minimum redundancy maximum relevance
OMS
Outage management system
OPM
Outage prediction model
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
26 of 29
POD
Power outage duration
QSVM
Quadratic support vector machine
QWD
Quantile weight distance
RF
Random forest
RF–ASD
Random forest–adaptive similar day
SCADA
Supervisory control and data acquisition
Stud GA
Stud genetic algorithm
SVM
Support vector machine
XGBoost
Extreme gradient boosting
References
1.
Shepovalova, O.; Izmailov, A.; Lobachevsky, Y.; Dorokhov, A. High-Efﬁciency Photovoltaic Equipment for Agriculture Power
Supply. Agriculture 2023, 13, 1234. [CrossRef]
2.
Zhao, J.; Zhang, Y.; Dong, X.; Wu, Y.; Zeng, H.; Duan, Q.; Zhang, M. Power Source Importance Assessment Based on Load
Importance and New Energy Uncertainty. Sustainability 2023, 15, 12941. [CrossRef]
3.
Kierzkowski, A.; Tubis, A.A. Transportation Systems Modeling, Simulation and Analysis with Reference to Energy Supplying.
Energies 2023, 16, 3586. [CrossRef]
4.
Javed, M.S.; Ma, T.; Jurasz, J.; Canales, F.A.; Lin, S.; Ahmed, S.; Zhang, Y. Economic Analysis and Optimization of a Renewable
Energy Based Power Supply System with Different Energy Storages for a Remote Island. Renew. Energy 2021, 164, 1376–1394.
[CrossRef]
5.
Jie, Y.; Liu, H.; Liang, J.; Huang, J.; Tao, X.; Ye, Y.; Liu, X.; Zhang, H. Research and Analysis of Environmental Sustainability Based
on Disposal of Waste Materials in Power Engineering Projects of Power Supply Enterprises. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci.
2019, 300, 042075. [CrossRef]
6.
Andrusca, M.; Adam, M.; Dragomir, A.; Lunca, E. Innovative Integrated Solution for Monitoring and Protection of Power Supply
System from Railway Infrastructure. Sensors 2021, 21, 7858. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Aa, A.; Os, A. Adequate Power Supply: A Must for Effective Teaching of Technological Education. Res. Dev. Mater. Sci. 2020, 13,
1432–1440. [CrossRef]
8.
Kahwash, F.; Barakat, B.; Taha, A.; Abbasi, Q.H.; Imran, M.A. Optimising Electrical Power Supply Sustainability Using a
Grid-Connected Hybrid Renewable Energy System—An NHS Hospital Case Study. Energies 2021, 14, 7084. [CrossRef]
9.
Haes Alhelou, H.; Hamedani-Golshan, M.E.; Njenda, T.C.; Siano, P. A Survey on Power System Blackout and Cascading Events:
Research Motivations and Challenges. Energies 2019, 12, 682. [CrossRef]
10.
Salman, H.M.; Pasupuleti, J.; Sabry, A.H. Review on Causes of Power Outages and Their Occurrence: Mitigation Strategies.
Sustainability 2023, 15, 15001. [CrossRef]
11.
Zhang, S.; Zhu, Z.; Li, Y. A Critical Review of Data-Driven Transient Stability Assessment of Power Systems: Principles, Prospects
and Challenges. Energies 2021, 14, 7238. [CrossRef]
12.
Strielkowski, W.; Vlasov, A.; Selivanov, K.; Muraviev, K.; Shakhnov, V. Prospects and Challenges of the Machine Learning and
Data-Driven Methods for the Predictive Analysis of Power Systems: A Review. Energies 2023, 16, 4025. [CrossRef]
13.
Almaghrebi, A.; Aljuheshi, F.; Rafaie, M.; James, K.; Alahmad, M. Data-Driven Charging Demand Prediction at Public Charging
Stations Using Supervised Machine Learning Regression Methods. Energies 2020, 13, 4231. [CrossRef]
14.
Vivas, E.; Allende-Cid, H.; Salas, R. A Systematic Review of Statistical and Machine Learning Methods for Electrical Power
Forecasting with Reported MAPE Score. Entropy 2020, 22, 1412. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Lotufo, A.D.P.; Minussi, C.R. Electric power systems load forecasting: A survey. In Proceedings of the PowerTech Budapest 99.
Abstract Records. (Cat. No.99EX376), Budapest, Hungary, 29 August–2 September 1999; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2002; p. 36.
[CrossRef]
16.
Blaga, R.; Sabadus, A.; Stefu, N.; Dughir, C.; Paulescu, M.; Badescu, V. A Current Perspective on the Accuracy of Incoming Solar
Energy Forecasting. Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 2019, 70, 119–144. [CrossRef]
17.
Miraftabzadeh, S.M.; Longo, M.; Foiadelli, F.; Pasetti, M.; Igual, R. Advances in the Application of Machine Learning Techniques
for Power System Analytics: A Survey. Energies 2021, 14, 4776. [CrossRef]
18.
Mahmoud, M.A.; Md Nasir, N.R.; Gurunathan, M.; Raj, P.; Mostafa, S.A. The Current State of the Art in Research on Predictive
Maintenance in Smart Grid Distribution Network: Fault’s Types, Causes, and Prediction Methods—A Systematic Review. Energies
2021, 14, 5078. [CrossRef]
19.
Ramesh, J.; Shahriar, S.; Al-Ali, A.R.; Osman, A.; Shaaban, M.F. Machine Learning Approach for Smart Distribution Transformers
Load Monitoring and Management System. Energies 2022, 15, 7981. [CrossRef]
20.
Forootan, M.M.; Larki, I.; Zahedi, R.; Ahmadi, A. Machine Learning and Deep Learning in Energy Systems: A Review. Sustainabil-
ity 2022, 14, 4832. [CrossRef]
21.
AlHaddad, U.; Basuhail, A.; Khemakhem, M.; Eassa, F.E.; Jambi, K. Towards Sustainable Energy Grids: A Machine Learning-Based
Ensemble Methods Approach for Outages Estimation in Extreme Weather Events. Sustainability 2023, 15, 12622. [CrossRef]
22.
Alimi, A.M.; Ouahada, K.; Abu-Mahfouz, A.M. A Review of Machine Learning Approaches to Power System Security and
Stability. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 113512–113531. [CrossRef]
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
27 of 29
23.
Hink, R.C.B.; Beaver, J.M.; Buckner, M.A.; Morris, T.; Adhikari, U.; Pan, S. Machine Learning for Power System Disturbance and
Cyber-Attack Discrimination. In Proceedings of the 2014 7th International Symposium on Resilient Control Systems: ISRCS,
Denver, CO, USA, 19–21 August 2014; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2014; pp. 1–8. [CrossRef]
24.
Cheng, L.; Wu, Z.; Duan, R.; Dong, K. Adaptive Compressive Sensing and Machine Learning for Power System Fault Classiﬁcation.
In Proceedings of the 2020 SoutheastCon, Raleigh, NC, USA, 28–29 March 2020; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2020; pp. 1–7.
[CrossRef]
25.
Miraftabzadeh, S.M.; Foiadelli, F.; Longo, M.; Pasetti, M. A Survey of Machine Learning Applications for Power System Analytics.
In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Environment and Electrical Engineering and 2019 IEEE Industrial
and Commercial Power Systems Europe: EEEIC/I&CPS Europe, Genova, Italy, 11–14 June 2019; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2019;
pp. 1–15. [CrossRef]
26.
Donnot, B.; Guyon, I.; Schoenauer, M.; Panciatici, P.; Marot, A. Introducing machine learning for power system operation support.
arXiv 2017, arXiv:1709.09527. [CrossRef]
27.
Ibrahim, M.S.; Dong, W.; Yang, Q. Machine Learning Driven Smart Electric Power Systems: Current Trends and New Perspectives.
Appl. Energy 2020, 272, 115237. [CrossRef]
28.
Kumbhar, A.; Dhawale, P.G.; Kumbhar, S.; Patil, U.; Magdum, P. A Comprehensive Review: Machine Learning and Its Application
in Integrated Power System. Energy Rep. 2021, 7, 5467–5474. [CrossRef]
29.
Yang, H.; Liu, X.; Zhang, D.; Chen, T.; Li, C.; Huang, W. Machine Learning for Power System Protection and Control. Electr. J.
2021, 34, 106881. [CrossRef]
30.
Zhang, Y.; Shi, X.; Zhang, H.; Cao, Y.; Terzija, V. Review on Deep Learning Applications in Frequency Analysis and Control of
Modern Power System. Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst. 2022, 136, 107744. [CrossRef]
31.
Mukherjee, D.; Chakraborty, S.; Ghosh, S. Power System State Forecasting Using Machine Learning Techniques. Electr. Eng. 2021,
104, 283–305. [CrossRef]
32.
Wu, W.; Hou, H.; Zhu, S.; Liu, Q.; Wei, R.; Huang, H.; Wang, L.; Luo, Y. An Intelligent Power Grid Emergency Allocation
Technology Considering Secondary Disaster and Public Opinion under Typhoon Disaster. Appl. Energy 2024, 353, 122038.
[CrossRef]
33.
Zhai, C.; Chen, T.Y.-J.; White, A.; Guikema, S.D. Power Outage Prediction for Natural Hazards Using Synthetic Power Distribution
Systems. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2021, 208, 107348. [CrossRef]
34.
Hou, H.; Liu, C.; Wei, R.; He, H.; Wang, L.; Li, W. Outage Duration Prediction under Typhoon Disaster with Stacking Ensemble
Learning. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2023, 237, 109398. [CrossRef]
35.
Cerrai, D.; Koukoula, M.; Watson, P.; Anagnostou, E.N. Outage Prediction Models for Snow and Ice Storms. Sustain. Energy Grids
Netw. 2020, 21, 100294. [CrossRef]
36.
Onaolapo, A.K.; Carpanen, R.P.; Dorrell, D.G.; Ojo, E.E. A Comparative Assessment of Conventional and Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks Methods for Electricity Outage Forecasting. Energies 2022, 15, 511. [CrossRef]
37.
Huang, X.; Wang, N. An Adaptive Nested Dynamic Downscaling Strategy of Wind-Field for Real-Time Risk Forecast of Power
Transmission Systems during Tropical Cyclones. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2024, 242, 109731. [CrossRef]
38.
Eskandarpour, R.; Khodaei, A.; Paaso, A.; Abdullah, N.M. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Assisted Power Grid Hardening in Response to
Extreme Weather Events. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1810.02866. [CrossRef]
39.
Hooshmand, A.; Asghari, B.; Sharma, R. A power management system for planned and unplanned grid electricity outages. In
Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Latin America: ISGT LATAM, Montevideo, Uruguay, 5–7
October 2015; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2016; pp. 382–386. [CrossRef]
40.
Xu, Z.; Liu, J.; Fan, W.; Wang, Y.; Luan, L.; Zhou, K. An Power Outage Prediction Method Based on XGBoost with Improved
Objective Function. In Proceedings of the 2022 37th Youth Academic Annual Conference of Chinese Association of Automation:
YAC, Beijing, China, 19–20 November 2022; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 1560–1565. [CrossRef]
41.
Duffey, R.B. Predicting Power System Reliability and Outage Duration Including Emergency Response. Dependability 2020, 20,
3–14. [CrossRef]
42.
Watson, P.L.; Spaulding, A.; Koukoula, M.; Anagnostou, E. Improved Quantitative Prediction of Power Outages Caused by
Extreme Weather Events. Weather Clim. Extrem. 2022, 37, 100487. [CrossRef]
43.
Das, S.; Kankanala, P.; Pahwa, A. Outage Estimation in Electric Power Distribution Systems Using a Neural Network Ensemble.
Energies 2021, 14, 4797. [CrossRef]
44.
Arif, A.; Wang, Z. Distribution Network Outage Data Analysis and Repair Time Prediction Using Deep Learning. In Proceedings
of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Probabilistic Methods Applied to Power Systems: PMAPS, Boise, ID, USA, 24–28
June 2018; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
45.
Lawanson, T.; Sharma, V.; Cecchi, V.; Hong, T. Analysis of Outage Frequency and Duration in Distribution Systems Using
Machine Learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 52nd North American Power Symposium: NAPS, Tempe, AZ, USA, 11–13 April
2021; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2021; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
46.
Zhao, Y.; Zhao, A.; He, H.; Xia, Z.; Zhou, Y. Correlation analysis of weather factors and outage duration. In Proceedings of the
2021 IEEE 4th International Electrical and Energy Conference: CIEEC, Wuhan, China, 28–30 May 2021; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ,
USA, 2021; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
28 of 29
47.
Mohammadian, M.; Aminifar, F.; Amjady, N.; Shahidehpour, M. Data-Driven Classiﬁer for Extreme Outage Prediction Based on
Bayes Decision Theory. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2021, 36, 4906–4914. [CrossRef]
48.
Ali, R.; Khosa, I.; Armghan, A.; Arshad, J.; Rabbani, S.; Alsharabi, N.; Hamam, H. Financial Hazard Prediction Due to Power
Outages Associated with Severe Weather-Related Natural Disaster Categories. Energies 2022, 15, 9292. [CrossRef]
49.
Owolabi, O.O.; Sunter, D.A. Bayesian Optimization and Hierarchical Forecasting of Non-Weather-Related Electric Power Outages.
Energies 2022, 15, 1958. [CrossRef]
50.
Yang, F.; Watson, P.; Koukoula, M.; Anagnostou, E.N. Enhancing Weather-Related Power Outage Prediction by Event Severity
Classiﬁcation. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 60029–60042. [CrossRef]
51.
Onaolapo, A.K.; Carpanen, R.P.; Dorrell, D.G.; Ojo, E.E. Event-Driven Power Outage Prediction Using Collaborative Neural
Networks. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 2023, 19, 3079–3087. [CrossRef]
52.
Doshi, R.; Rishabh Dev, S.; Kansal, S. Time Duration Prediction of Electrical Power Outages. In Smart Structures in Energy
Infrastructure; Springer: Singapore, 2021; pp. 31–40. [CrossRef]
53.
Duffey, R.B. Power Restoration Prediction Following Extreme Events and Disasters. Int. J. Disaster Risk Sci. 2018, 10, 134–148.
[CrossRef]
54.
Nateghi, R.; Guikema, S.D.; Quiring, S.M. Forecasting Hurricane-Induced Power Outage Durations. Nat. Hazard. 2014, 74,
1795–1811. [CrossRef]
55.
Wei, T.; Zhang, Z.; Li, W.; Gao, Y. Research on the Prediction Optimization of Power Outage Duration of 10Kv Distribution
Network Based on the Reliability Data of Power Supply Analysis. In Proceedings of the 2018 China International Conference on
Electricity Distribution: CICED, Tianjin, China, 17–19 September 2018; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2018; pp. 496–503. [CrossRef]
56.
Cole, T.A.; Wanik, D.W.; Molthan, A.L.; Román, M.O.; Grifﬁn, R.E. Synergistic Use of Nighttime Satellite Data, Electric Utility
Infrastructure, and Ambient Population to Improve Power Outage Detections in Urban Areas. Remote Sens. 2017, 9, 286.
[CrossRef]
57.
Jaech, A.; Zhang, B.; Ostendorf, M.; Kirschen, D.S. Real-time prediction of the duration of distribution system outages. IEEE Trans.
Power Syst. 2018, 34, 773–781. [CrossRef]
58.
Montoya-Rincon, J.P.; Azad, S.; Pokhrel, R.; Ghandehari, M.; Jensen, M.P.; Gonzalez, J.E. On the Use of Satellite Nightlights for
Power Outages Prediction. IEEE Access 2022, 10, 16729–16739. [CrossRef]
59.
Arora, P.; Ceferino, L. Probabilistic and Machine Learning Methods for Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation in Power Outage Prediction
due to Extreme Events. Nat. Hazard. Earth Syst. Sci. 2023, 23, 1665–1683. [CrossRef]
60.
Watson, P.L.; Koukoula, M.; Anagnostou, E. Inﬂuence of the Characteristics of Weather Information in a Thunderstorm-Related
Power Outage Prediction System. Forecasting 2021, 3, 541–560. [CrossRef]
61.
Alpay, B.A.; Wanik, D.; Watson, P.; Cerrai, D.; Liang, G.; Anagnostou, E. Dynamic Modeling of Power Outages Caused by
Thunderstorms. Forecasting 2020, 2, 151–162. [CrossRef]
62.
Liévanos, R.S.; Horne, C. Unequal resilience: The duration of electricity outages. Energy Policy 2017, 108, 201–211. [CrossRef]
63.
Kong, X.; Liu, C.; Shen, Y.; Hu, W.; Ma, T. Power Supply Reliability Evaluation Based on Big Data Analysis for Distribution
Networks Considering Uncertain Factors. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2020, 63, 102483. [CrossRef]
64.
Atrigna, M.; Buonanno, A.; Carli, R.; Cavone, G.; Scarabaggio, P.; Valenti, M.; Graditi, G.; Dotoli, M. A Machine Learning
Approach to Fault Prediction of Power Distribution Grids Under Heatwaves. IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. 2023, 59, 4835–4845.
[CrossRef]
65.
Cerrai, D.; Wanik, D.W.; Bhuiyan, M.A.E.; Zhang, X.; Yang, J.; Frediani, M.E.; Anagnostou, E.N. Predicting Storm Outages
Through New Representations of Weather and Vegetation. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 29639–29654. [CrossRef]
66.
Graditi, G.; Buonanno, A.; Caliano, M.; Di Somma, M.; Valenti, M. Machine Learning Applications for Renewable-Based Energy
Systems; EAI/Springer Innovations in Communication and Computing; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2023; Volume Part F665,
pp. 177–198. [CrossRef]
67.
Zhao, Z.; Anand, R.; Wang, M. Maximum relevance and minimum redundancy feature selection methods for a marketing
machine learning platform. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics:
DSAA, Washington, DC, USA, 5–8 October 2019; pp. 442–452. [CrossRef]
68.
Ghasemkhani, B.; Yilmaz, R.; Birant, D.; Kut, R.A. Machine Learning Models for the Prediction of Energy Consumption Based on
Cooling and Heating Loads in Internet-of-Things-Based Smart Buildings. Symmetry 2022, 14, 1553. [CrossRef]
69.
Ng, A. Machine Learning Yearning: Techincal Strategy for AI Engineers, in the Era of Deep Learning. 2018. Available online:
https://www.deeplearning.ai/machine-learning-yearning (accessed on 19 June 2024).
70.
Peterson, L. K-nearest neighbor. Scholarpedia 2009, 4, 1883. [CrossRef]
71.
Myles, A.J.; Feudale, R.N.; Liu, Y.; Woody, N.A.; Brown, S.D. An introduction to decision tree modeling. Chem. Aust. 2004, 18,
275–285. [CrossRef]
72.
Biau, G.; Scornet, E. A random forest guided tour. Test 2016, 25, 197–227. [CrossRef]
73.
Wade, C. Hands-On Gradient Boosting with XGBoost and Scikit-Learn: Perform Accessible Machine Learning and Extreme Gradient
Boosting with Python; Packt Publishing, Ltd.: Birmingham, UK, 2020.
74.
Zhang, W.; Liu, S.; Wang, L.; Samui, P.; Chwała, M.; He, Y. Landslide Susceptibility Research Combining Qualitative Analysis and
Quantitative Evaluation: A Case Study of Yunyang County in Chongqing, China. Forests 2022, 13, 1055. [CrossRef]
Sensors 2024, 24, 4313
29 of 29
75.
Mbuya, B.H.; Dimovski, A.; Merlo, M.; Kivevele, T. Very Short-Term Blackout Prediction for Grid-Tied PV Systems Operating in
Low Reliability Weak Electric Grids of Developing Countries. Complexity 2022, 2022, 4763820. [CrossRef]
76.
Taimoor, N.; Khosa, I.; Jawad, M.; Akhtar, J.; Ghous, I.; Qureshi, M.B.; Ansari, A.R.; Nawaz, R. Power Outage Estimation: The
Study of Revenue-Led Top Affected States of US. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 223271–223286. [CrossRef]
77.
Eskandarpour, R.; Khodaei, A.; Arab, A. Improving Power Grid Resilience through Predictive Outage Estimation. In Proceedings
of the 2017 North American Power Symposium: NAPS, Morgantown, WV, USA, 16 September 2017; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA;
Volume 217, pp. 1–5. [CrossRef]
78.
Eskandarpour, R.; Khodaei, A. Machine learning based power grid outage prediction in response to extreme events. IEEE Trans.
Power Syst. 2016, 32, 3315–3316. [CrossRef]
79.
Nateghi, R.; Guikema, S.D.; Quiring, S.M. Comparison and validation of statistical methods for predicting power outage durations
in the event of hurricanes. Risk Anal. 2011, 31, 1897–1906. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80.
Liu, H.; Davidson, R.A.; Apanasovich, T.V. Statistical forecasting of electric power restoration times in hurricanes and ice storms.
IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2007, 22, 2270–2279. [CrossRef]
81.
Mbuli, N.; Mendu, B.; Pretorius, J.-H.C. Statistical analysis of forced outage duration data for subtransmission circuit breakers.
Energy Rep. 2022, 8, 1424–1433. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
