Predictive Modeling of Power Outages during Extreme
Events: Integrating Weather and Socio-Economic Factors
Antar Kumar Biswas and Masoud H. Nazari∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan.
Abstract
This paper presents a novel learning-based framework for predicting power out-
ages caused by extreme events.
The proposed approach specifically targets low-
probability, high-consequence outage scenarios and leverages a comprehensive set of
features derived from publicly available data sources. We integrate EAGLE-I out-
age records (2014–2024) with weather, socio-economic, infrastructure, and seasonal
event data. Incorporating social and demographic indicators reveals underlying pat-
terns of community vulnerability and provides a clearer understanding of outage risk
during extreme conditions. Four machine learning models—Random Forest (RF),
Support Vector Machine (SVM), Adaptive Boosting (AdaBoost), and Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) —are evaluated. Experimental validation is performed on a
large-scale dataset covering counties in the lower peninsula of Michigan. Among all
models tested, the LSTM network achieves the lowest prediction error. Addition-
ally, the result demonstrates that stronger economic conditions and more developed
infrastructure are associated with lower outage occurrence.
Keywords:
Power system resilience, power outage prediction, machine learning.
1. Introduction
Low-Probability High-Consequence (LPHC) events—such as floods, hurricanes,
and winter storms—pose severe threats to power systems reliability and resilience.
[1]. These events can cause large-scale blackouts and economic losses, as seen in
∗Corresponding author: Masoud H. Nazari (email: masoud.nazari@wayne.edu)
arXiv:2512.22699v1  [cs.LG]  27 Dec 2025
Hurricane Sandy (2012), Irma (2017), and the 2021 Texas winter storm [2, 3, 4].
Several studies has explored a wide range of modeling approaches to understand and
predict the relationship between extreme weather conditions and outage occurrence.
For example, Eskandarpour et al. [5] predicted component damage prior to hurri-
canes by establishing decision boundaries using logistic regression. Spatial–temporal
poisson regression has also been applied to model transmission line failure proba-
bilities during severe weather events [6]. Although these methods offer clear in-
terpretability, their linear assumptions limit their ability to capture the complex
multi-variable interactions.
ML models provide an effective framework to manage complex non-linear re-
lationships and process substantial data volumes in real-time [7].
These models
outperform traditional statistical approaches due to their ability to model nonlin-
earities and integrate diverse datasets, including weather, infrastructure, and socio-
economic indicators. Classification-based ML studies such as [8, 9] used models like
SVM and boosted classifiers to determine outage occurrence or component damage.
Regression-based studies have used tree-based ensembles such as Decision Trees,
RF, AdaBoost, and XGBoost to predict outage counts, durations, or affected cus-
tomers [10, 11, 12]. Deep learning approaches further extend predictive capability
by capturing temporal and sequential patterns in outage and weather data. Arif et
al. [13] employed deep neural networks to estimate restoration times, and recurrent
architectures such as recurrent neural networks (RNN) to model temporal outage
progression under varying environmental conditions. These models offer strong pre-
dictive performance but require large, high-quality datasets. Some studies examined
on the outages driven by routine weather or equipment failures. Jaech et al. [14]
applied RNN-based models with environmental and operational data to predict out-
age duration in Seattle, while Sun et al. [15] used AdaBoost to estimate outage
counts in Kansas. Sarwat et al. [16] showed that day-to-day weather conditions
influence power outage. Our work focuses on LPHC events that generate large-scale
2
disruptions and require fundamentally different modeling considerations.
The state-of-the-art studies often encounter challenges that can compromise the
accuracy of their analyses. A major limitation is the scarcity of historical data on
extreme events and the associated power outages. In particular, during such events,
several monitoring devices may fail, resulting in incomplete and imbalanced datasets.
In [17, 18, 19], Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE) has been used
to address data imbalance in classification tasks in power outage studies. However,
SMOTE is effective for categorical targets, it is less productive for LPHC outage
prediction, which is framed as a regression problem. Another limitations arises when
models are trained on a single extreme event, as they exhibit limited adaptability to
concurrent incidents with complex, multi-variable interactions [20]. As shown in [21],
combining data from two winter storm events instead of one improves power outage
prediction. Furthermore, socio-economic features are often missing in the previous
models. As demonstrated in Cruz et al. [11], socio-economic indicators such as in-
come levels and housing characteristics provide important context for understanding
community vulnerability. Counties with lower income or higher unemployment tend
to have fewer resources for preparedness, which can increase outage severity and
prolong restoration times. Similar observations have been reported in other studies
[13, 14], where result shows that socio-economic factors contribute to prolonged out-
age durations and higher customer outage number. Incorporating socio-economic
variables therefore enables a more comprehensive understanding of outage dynamics,
supports improved prediction performance for LPHC events.
In our prior work [19], we developed ML models to predict power outage prob-
abilities, investigating the impact of socio-economic and infrastructure factors on
non-LPHC outage events. This paper builds on those findings and proposes en-
hanced methodologies to predict power outages due to extreme weather events. The
contributions of this paper are outlined as follows:
1) Comprehensive Data Integration: Our model combines weather, socio-economic,
3
and infrastructure data, along with seasonal indicators, to capture the complex fac-
tors influencing power outages.
This comprehensive integration significantly en-
hances the predictive performance of the model.
2) Innovative Use of SMOGN and KNN to Address Data Scarcity in LPHC
Events: This work introduces the application of the Synthetic Minority Over-sampling
Technique for Regression (SMOGN) and K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) methods to
mitigate data imbalance and missing data challenges associated with LPHC events.
By adapting these techniques to the outage prediction context, the proposed frame-
work effectively addresses data scarcity and improves the accuracy and robustness
of LPHC event prediction.
3) Evaluation of ML Models: We evaluate multiple ML and deep learning (DL)
models, with LSTM proven particularly effective due to its ability to capture tempo-
ral patterns in time-series data. This makes our model highly suited for real-world
power outage forecasting.
4) Large-Scale Validation: We validate our approach on a large-scale dataset
spanning 2014 to 2022 across Michigan counties, ensuring the model’s robustness
and generalizability to diverse geographic regions and socio-economic conditions.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section II presents the data
description and preparation. In section III, the methodology is discussed. Experi-
mental setup is presented in section IV. The experimental results and discussion are
provided in section V. Finally, the conclusion is drawn in section VI.
2. Data Description and Preparation
2.1. Historical Outage Data
In this study, the EAGLE-I dataset is utilized to analyze severe power outages
caused by LPHC events. The EAGLE-I dataset [22], collected and managed by Oak
Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), spans from November 2014 to December 2024.
This dataset, updated every 15 minutes, aggregates data from utility companies’
4
Figure 1: Number of customers outage in Wayne County during 2024 based on
EAGLE-1 dataset.
public outage maps using an ETL (Extract, Transform, Load) process to estimate
the number of customers affected by power outages in each county. For this analysis,
we focus on the outage data relevant to Michigan. Fig. 1 illustrates the daily number
of customer outages in Wayne County throughout 2024.
In this context, a “customer" is defined as any entity that purchases energy
from a utility under a specific tariff, rather than individual persons. Given that in
the EAGLE-I, number of customers affected by power outage is recorded, and to
ensure a fair comparison between counties with different sizes, it is crucial to adjust
it for population differences. This can be done by collecting population data for
each county from the U.S. Census Bureau2. This approach allows us to normalize
outage data relative to population size. In this way, the number of customers in the
EAGLE-I dataset is divided by the population of the county scaled by 2 as shown
in (1).
Po = Number of customers lost power ∗2
Population of the county
(1)
It is estimated that, on average, each customer corresponds to approximately two
residents [23].
2https://data.census.gov/table
5
2.2. Historical Weather Data
Historical hourly weather data was obtained from Open-Meteo, an open-source
weather API that provides high-resolution meteorological information on an hourly
basis 3. This data source serves as the dynamic variable of the model. For instance,
weather data offers insights into conditions that could lead to outages, such as wind
speed and temperature. We have chosen 8 features including air temperature (F),
precipitation (inch), wind speed (km/h), wind gusts (km/h), shortwave radiation
(W/m2), relative humidity (%), cloud cover (%), and surface pressure (hPa). The
Fig. 2 shows the locations of weather stations across the Lower Peninsula of Michi-
gan used in this study.
The historical weather data often has missing data, particularly during LPHC
events. To address this issue, we employ K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) imputation
method describe as follows:
Algorithm 1 KNN Algorithm for Finding the Nearest Counties
Input:
k ←5 (Number of nearest counties to be found)
Si ←Stationi (Find the k nearest counties of Si)
(xi, yi) (Coordinates of Si)
Dij (Euclidean distance between Si and Sj)
Procedure:
for k = 1, . . . , j do
Calculate Dij between Si and Sj using equation (2)
Sort distances between Si and all other counties in descending order
Select the first k closest counties to Si
end for
Output: 5 nearest counties to Si
For a given countyi, the k closest counties are determined by calculating the
Euclidean distance between countyi and every other county, as described in (2).
Euclidean Distance(Si, Sj) =
q
(xi −xj)2 + (yi −yj)2
(2)
3https:https://open-meteo.com/
6
where (xi, yi) and (xj, yj) represent the coordinates of counties Si and Sj, respec-
tively. Then, impute the missing data by averaging the selected neighbors:
Missing V alue = 1
j
j
X
i=1
Observed valuei
(3)
where j represents the number of nearest counties considered for the imputation,
identified by the K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) algorithm [24]. Finally, the dataset is
normalized using min-max scaler.
Figure 2: Weather stations locations in Lower Peninsula of Michigan.
2.3. Socio-economic Data
Socio-economic indicators provide meaningful insights into community vulnera-
bility and resilience. This hidden knowledge is instrumental in understanding factors
that are not immediately obvious from basic data analysis. For this study, socio-
economic indicators were obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau, including the dis-
tribution of the year when residential structures were built, the average household
income, and the county-level unemployment rate. The selected data was retrieved
from the U.S. Census Bureau American Community Survey (ACS) 5-Year Estimates
via the Census API. 4
The distribution of the year when residential structures were built reflects the
4https://api.census.gov/data/2021/acs/acs5
7
age and durability of the electric infrastructure.
Average household income and
unemployment capture the economic capacity and stress of a community, influencing
both infrastructure investment and the speed of recovery from extreme weather
events. Together, these factors complement power infrastructure data by capturing
socio-economic conditions that influence outage occurrence and restoration.
2.4. Power Infrastructure Data
The infrastructure features, including the number of poles, towers, substations,
transformers, and lines for each county, are collected from the Open Street Map
dataset [25] as shown in Fig. 3. Given that the detailed topology of the power
distribution network is typically not publicly available, data from the Open Street
Map can serve as a useful approximation of the actual topology for research purposes.
Furthermore, they provide information on how extensively the system might be
affected by extreme conditions such as high winds [26].
For this study, the total number of each feature within a county is aggregated
and then counted to provide a comprehensive overview of the area’s characteristics.
Then, we perform column-wise normalization, where we divide the total number of
each type of infrastructure in a county by the sum of that feature across the entire
state. This method allows us to determine which county has a higher proportion of
a particular infrastructure component, such as towers.
Figure 3: Power infrastructure network of counties in Lower Peninsula of Michigan.
8
3. Data-driven Outage Prediction Algorithm
The proposed multi-step county-level power outage prediction algorithm is illus-
trated in Fig. 4. The algorithm follows a four-step process. First, data preparation
is performed, where different input features are preprocessed and integrated into a
unified dataset. Second, the integrated dataset is rebalanced to reduce the impact
of data imbalance and missing data. Third, multiple machine learning models are
trained to capture the complex relationships between weather, socio-economic, and
infrastructure factors and outage occurrence. Finally, the performance of the models
is evaluated using standard metrics.
EAGLE-I
Data
Weather Station 
data
Infrastructure 
Data
Socio-economic 
Data
Estimate Missing Data using 
KNN and Apply SMOGN to 
Balance the Dataset
Predicted 
Outage
Outage 
Prediction 
Model
Train-Test 
Split
Evaluate 
Performance 
Metrics
Extreme 
Weather 
Filtration
Data Preparation
Dataset Balancing
Evaluating
Training & Testing
Figure 4: The framework of the proposed power outage prediction algorithm.
3.1. Identifying Extreme Weather Event Data
The outage and weather dataset spans the period from 1 November 2014 to 30
December 2024. Within this time frame, a total of 236 weather-related extreme out-
age events were identified from the National Centers for Environmental Information
(NOAA) 5. Fig. 5 illustrates the distribution of extreme weather events across 20
Michigan counties.
This distribution shows that extreme events are sparse. To address this lim-
itation, seasonal information aligned with the timing of distinct extreme weather
5https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/stormevents/
9
Figure 5: Number of Extreme Events by County (2014–2024).
patterns is incorporated. For a specified extreme event day (denoted as dex), we
identify all days within the same season and include them in the set R. This is
defined as:
R = {d1, d2, . . . , dj} where dj ∈(mi−1, mi, mi+1)
where, mi represents a month within a season, selected from the set M = {m1, m2, m3, . . . , m12}.
The next step involves calculating the L2norm of the weather features between
the extreme day (dex) and all other days in set R. This comparison helps identify
days with weather patterns most similar to the extreme event day.
Assume wdex is the matrix of weather features for the extreme day (comprising 8
features, one for each weather features). The weather features for the j days are
represented by the matrix Wd as follows:
Wdex =

w1dex
w2dex
· · ·
w8dex

Wd =









w1d1
w2d1
· · ·
w8d1
w1d2
w2d2
· · ·
w8d2
...
...
...
...
w1dj
w2dj
· · ·
w8dj









(4)
10
The L2 norm between the row vector wdex of Wdex and each row vector wdj of Wd
is calculated using the following formula:
L2 norm(wdex, wdj) =
v
u
u
t
8
X
k=1
(wkdex −wkdj)2
(5)
Here, Wdex =

w1dex
w2dex
· · ·
w8dex

is the row vector of extreme day’s
weather features, Wdj =

w1dj
w2dj
· · ·
w8dj

is the j-th row vector of Wd, wkdex
and wkdj are the elements of Wdex and Wdj, respectively.
Subsequently, the calculation is repeated for each row in the matrix Wd, cor-
responding to each day dj within the set R. For each day, compute the L2 norm
between the weather feature vector of the extreme day Wdex and that of the day dj,
denoted as Wdj. This results in a j × 1 matrix where each element represents the
L2norm between Wdex and Wdj. The process is outlined mathematically as follows:
L2Norm =









L2 norm(Wdex, Wd1)
L2 norm(Wdex, Wd2)
...
L2 norm(Wdex, Wdj)









(6)
Finally, we select the weather features and outage data of days with the lowest
L2norm from matrix L2Norm, indicating the highest similarity to the extreme
event day. Incorporating these seasonal references significantly enhances the model’s
ability to differentiate between various outages in the dataset. Then, the dataset is
rebalanced and used to train the machine learning models described in the following
subsections.
3.2. Input Data Balancing
A key challenge in predicting LPHC outages is the imbalance in outage data,
where small-scale events dominate and large-scale extreme events are minority. This
11
Algorithm 2 SMOGN for Outage-Ratio Rebalancing
Input:
D ←Training dataset (hourly), with features X
T ←Threshold of minority and majority instances
k ←Number of nearest neighbors
O% ←Percentage of over-sampling
U% ←Percentage of under-sampling
Partition:
Smin ←yi ≥T (Minority instances)
Smaj ←yi < T (Majority instances)
/*Over-Sampling minority instances*/
for S ∈Smin do
ˆSmin ←|S| × O%
for sample ∈S do
KList ←k nearest neighbors of sample
Distances ←distance between sample and each neighbor
SafeRange ←0.5 × median(Distances)
for i = 1 to ˆSmin do
X ←randomly selected neighbor from KList
if Distance(X, sample) < SafeRange then
Xnew ←SMOTER interpolation
else
Xnew ←sample + Gaussian Noise
end if
Append Xnew to Dnew
end for
end for
end for
/*Under-Sampling majority cases*/
for S ∈Smaj do
under_sampled_instances ←randomly sample |S| × U% instances
Append under_sampled_instances to Dnew
end for
Output: Rebalanced training set Dnew
imbalance causes ML models to favor frequent low-impact cases, leading to poor
performance on the critical but infrequent LPHC events. In order to balance the
dataset, we apply SMOGN, which has been introduced to address the issue of imbal-
anced datasets in regression tasks [27]. It integrates two over-sampling technique,
SMOTER and SMOTER-GN [28]. While the L2norm filtering step extracts outages
associated with extreme events, the SMOGN algorithm addresses the imbalance in
12
outage severity within these events. SMOGN generates synthetic data by applying
three key techniques: random under-sampling, SMOTER (Synthetic Minority Over-
sampling Technique for Regression), and adding Gaussian noise. Random under-
sampling involves randomly removing samples from the majority class. It generates
new synthetic samples by interpolating rare cases. This is done by taking a weighted
average of the target variable values between the original minority instance and its
k-nearest neighbors [28].
Figure 6: Probability distribution of customer outages in the EAGLE-I dataset
(2014–2024), shown before and after applying SMOGN.
SMOGN is summarized in Algorithm 2: We mark a case as rare if its outage
value is in the top 30% of the target distribution. A rarity threshold of 380 customers
out was used and five nearest rare dataset neighbors were considered for SMOTER
interpolation within a safe region. Also, Gaussian noise with perturbation 2% was
added when neighbors lie outside the local safe range. Minority cases were oversam-
pled approximately one-to-one, and the majority was undersampled to one half. Fig.
6 shows the influence of SMOGN on the outage occurrence probability distribution
for the extreme weather dataset used in the case study.
The original dataset is dominated by small outages near zero, while the rebal-
anced dataset includes more high-consequence outages. After rebalancing, probabil-
ity is reduced in the low-outage region and increased in the mid/high-outage region
beyond the threshold.
13
3.3. Model Selection and Training
After the input data has been rebalanced, the following ML models are trained
to capture its complex patterns:
Random Forest (RF): RF for regression is an ensemble learning method that
constructs multiple decision trees during training and outputs the average prediction
of all trees for regression tasks. Each tree is trained on randomly selected subsets of
data, reducing the correlation between trees and mitigating over-fitting. To predict
customer outages number, a Random Forest Regressor was trained using weather
and socio-economic features.
The model is trained with 100 decision trees and
evaluated on the same dataset.
Support Vector Machine (SVM): SVM for regression identifies an optimal
hyperplane in a higher-dimensional space that best fits the data while maximizing
the distance from the nearest points. It minimizes errors, making it suitable for
predicting continuous variables. SVM uses kernel functions to map the data into a
space where these nonlinear patterns become easier to fit.
Adaptive Boosting (AdaBoost): It is a boosting algorithm for regression
which strengthens weak models by prioritizing harder-to-predict instances, refining
the ensemble’s accuracy with each iteration.
The final prediction is a weighted
sum of the predictions from all weak learners, with weights determined based on
their performance.
Given the imbalanced nature of outage data, AdaBoost can
concentrate learning on rare and high-impact outage conditions.
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM): LSTM networks are a type of RNN
specialized in processing sequences of data. They are particularly effective for re-
gression tasks involving time-series data due to their ability to capture temporal
dependencies over different time intervals. In this study, historical weather, socio-
economic, and infrastructure features are processed through the LSTM to capture
patterns over time, followed by a dense output layer for outage prediction.
14
3.4. Performance Evaluation
The following common performance metrics are used for models evaluation [29]:
Mean Absolute Error (MAE): It measures the average deviation of the pre-
dicted values from the actual observed values. It shows how far the model’s predic-
tions are from the actual values on average.
MAE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
|Po(i) −
ˆ
Po(i)|
(7)
Mean Square Error (MSE): That metric measures the average of the squared
differences between the estimated values and the actual observed values.
Lower
MSE indicates that the model is more consistent and accurate across the full range
of observations.
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(Po(i) −
ˆ
Po(i))2
(8)
In both expressions, Po(i) denotes the actual observed value and
ˆ
Po(i) represents
the predicted value.
3.5. Outage Prediction Model Formulation
With all relevant features integrated into the dataset, the problem is formulated
as predicting county-level power outages under extreme events. Eq. 9 shows the
model formulation.
Po(t) = f
 Po(t −1), Po(t −2), · · · , Po(t −n),
W(t), W(t −1), · · · , W(t −n), S, If

(9)
Here, Po(t) denotes the ratio of customers without power in a county at time t during
an extreme event, and Po(t −k) is the corresponding ratio observed during the k-th
most recent extreme event. W(t) is the vector of contemporaneous weather features
for the county, while W(t −k) contains the weather features recorded for the k-th
15
most recent event. S comprises socio-economic indicators, including average house-
hold income, unemployment rate, and the distribution of year built for residential
structures. If aggregates power-system attributes such as counts of poles, towers,
substations, transformers, and line segments by county.
4. Experimental Setup and Simulation Results
The dataset is divided into training (2014 to 2018), validation (2019), and test
(2020–2021) sets to evaluate the performance of the models. The implementation of
RF, SVM, and AdaBoost is done using Python Scikit-learn library [30] and LSTM
is implemented using Tensorflow library [31].
We conducted hyperparameter tuning utilizing the Grid- Search tool in Python
[30], employing cross-validation to identify the optimal input parameters for the
models, as shown in Table 1. The LSTM network is a one-layer LSTM with 128
nodes followed by a Dense layer. The LSTM layer employs its standard activation
structure, where the cell state is updated using a tanh activation and the gating
mechanisms use sigmoid functions. Adam optimizer is used with a learning rate of
0.001 and a batch size of 128.
Table 1: Cross-Validation Hyper-Parameters Selection
Hyper-Parameter
RF
SVM
AdaBoost
Kernel
rbf
Learning Rate
-
-
0.001
Estimators
4
-
120
Loss
square
C
-
10
-
Max Depth
100
-
-
Gamma
-
0.001
-
Fig. 7 illustrates the correlation analysis between socio-economic, infrastructure
features and power outages. Higher mean income, lower unemployment rate, and
more extensive infrastructure, including towers, lines, transformers, and poles, are
associated with lower outages, suggesting that wealthier counties or those with more
16
infrastructure might have higher power systems resilience. Substations and the year
of structure construction also show a slight correlation, indicating newer or more
substations may lead to improved outage resistance.
Figure 7: Pearson’s correlation of the customers outage number with the infrastruc-
ture and socio-economic variables.
We also conducted a feature importance analysis using the RF-based Mean De-
crease in Impurity (MDI). Fig. 8 depicts the contribution of each feature to the
model’s predictive accuracy.
The analysis showed that weather variables domi-
nate outage prediction, with precipitation (19%), wind speed (13.5%), and surface
pressure (13.1%) being the top contributors. Non-weather features, including in-
frastructure density (3.5%) and socioeconomic indicators such as average income
(1.4%), also exhibit contribution to the prediction.
Figure 8: Features importance across weather, infrastructure, and socioeconomic
variables.
17
After these relationships are established, the models are trained using different
combinations of input data, both with and without the inclusion of socioeconomic,
infrastructure, and weather features, so that the influence of each data layer on
predictive performance can be examined.
By comparing model accuracy across
these configurations, the added value of these additional features is evaluated, and
their overall impact on the outage prediction process is determined.
Scenario-1 =
 Po(t −1), Po(t −2), · · · , Po(t −n),
W(t), W(t −1), · · · , W(t −n)

Scenario-2 =
 Po(t −1), Po(t −2), · · · , Po(t −n),
W(t), W(t −1), · · · , W(t −n), S, If

Scenario 1 uses weather data from the event day and the preceding day, together
with outage information from the day before the extreme event and seasonal weather
patterns. This configuration enables the models to utilize historical outage behavior
along with weather conditions to estimate future outages. Scenario 2 expands upon
this by incorporating all data used in Scenario 1 together with infrastructure and
socioeconomic information.
Table 2: Performance Comparison of Models in Scenario-1 and Scenario-2.
Model
Scenario-1
Scenario-2
MSE
MAE
MSE
MAE
RF
0.0231
0.0898
0.0222
0.0827
SVM
0.0175
0.0796
0.0172
0.0774
AdaBoost
0.0210
0.0735
0.0204
0.0730
LSTM
0.0127
0.0749
0.0086
0.0432
Table. 2 presents the performance of each model and shows that the scenario
incorporating socioeconomic and infrastructure information produces lower predic-
tion error. This outcome provides evidence that incorporating socioeconomic and
infrastructure variables enhances the model’s predictive capability.
18
Figure 9: Performance comparison between models in terms of MSE.
Fig. 10 illustrates the performance of the model by comparing the predicted out-
age values with the actual recorded values for LSTM model. Each point represents
a data sample from the validation period, and the diagonal line indicates the ideal
one to one correspondence between predicted and observed outages. As shown in
the figure, the majority of the predictions follow the general upward trend of the
reference line.
Figure 10: Scatter-plots of predicted versus actual customer outage for LSTM model.
Fig. 11 illustrates the comparison between the predicted and actual customer
outage counts for the June 6–8, 2020 flood event in Wayne County, Michigan using
four models: RF, SVM, AdaBoost, and LSTM. The time series plots show how well
each model follows the temporal evolution and magnitude of the observed outages.
Among the four models, the LSTM provides the closest match to the actual outage
19
pattern. This indicates that the LSTM is able to effectively exploit temporal depen-
dencies in the sequence of weather and related features during the event window.
The Random Forest model also exhibits good performance. The AdaBoost model
shows moderate agreement with the actual outages. The SVM model presents the
weakest performance among the four.
The performance of our proposed outage prediction framework is also compared
with state-of-the-art studies in Table 3. To ensure fairness, the comparison is limited
to works that employed the EAGLE-I dataset as the primary source of historical out-
age records. Table 3 highlights that prior studies either rely on limited feature sets
or provide low-resolution prediction outputs, such as maximum or averages outage
customers number. In contrast, our method integrates weather, socio-economic, in-
frastructure, and seasonal indicators to deliver accurate county-level, hourly outage
predictions during extreme events.
(a) RF prediction vs. actual outages
(b) SVM prediction vs. actual outages
(c) AdaBoost prediction vs. actual outages
(d) LSTM prediction vs. actual outages
Figure 11: Comparison of predicted and actual outage counts for the June 2020
flood event in Wayne County.
Given that this model is primarily trained on data from extreme weather and
socio-economic features, it is well-suited to be used for planning to enhance the
20
Table 3: Comparison of Proposed Work With State-of-the-Art Studies.
Study
Dataset
Features
Used
Best Model
Prediction
Resolution
Lee
et
al. [12]
EAGLE-I
+
NWS alerts
Weather
fea-
tures only
XGBoost
(R2
=
0.998,
RMSE = 2115
customers)
Event-level max-
imum
outage
prediction;
No
hourly
or
county-level
resolution
Cruz et
al. [11]
EAGLE-I
+
NASA
weather
+
Census data
Weather
+
Socio-
economic
RF:
MSE
=
5.93e-05
MAE = 0.00102
RMSE
=
0.00770
Next-day
av-
erage
outage
prediction;
Not
high-
resolution
Our
Work
(Pro-
posed)
EAGLE-I
+
Open-Meteo
+
Census
+
Infrastructure
Weather
+
Socio-
economic
+
Infrastructure
+
Seasonal
indicators
LSTM
(MSE = 0.0086,
MAE = 0.0432)
County-level,
hourly
outage
prediction
dur-
ing
extreme
events
resilience of power systems. Planning can be done through simulating the system’s
performance across a range of severe weather scenarios.
5. Conclusions
In this paper, we presented a novel machine learning–based approach for pre-
dicting power outages caused by LPHC events. The method integrated historical
outage data from the EAGLE-I dataset, weather data from Open-Meteo, as well as
infrastructure and socio-economic information to construct predictive models. We
addressed the challenges of limited data availability and missing records for LPHC
events by applying KNN and SMOGN methods. We showed the correlations be-
tween socio-economic and infrastructure features with extreme power outages. Sev-
eral machine learning models, including RF, SVM, AdaBoost, and LSTM networks,
were compared. The experimental evaluation on Michigan counties demonstrated
that the LSTM model consistently outperformed RF, AdaBoost, and SVM in terms
of lowest error. Our analysis indicated that weather-related variables—particularly
21
precipitation and wind speed were the primary drivers of outages, while infrastruc-
ture and socio-economic factors exerted secondary influences. This model can be
adapted to other regions by incorporating localized data, including region-specific
weather patterns and infrastructure conditions as well as local social-economic in-
formation. Similarly, extending the model to handle other types of extreme events
(e.g., wildfires and earthquakes) could be achieved by adding relevant features and
retraining the model on new data.
References
[1] Y. Xu, Y. Xing, Q. Huang, J. Li, G. Zhang, O. Bamisile, and Q. Huang, “A
review of resilience enhancement strategies in renewable power system under
HILP events,” Energy Reports, vol. 9, pp. 200–209, 2023.
[2] “Texas’s Winter Storm Killed Hundreds More Than Reported,” 2022, accessed
on: 7 December 2022. Available: https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/
peteraldhous/texas-winter-storm-power-outage-death-toll.
[3] “Texas Power Outages Led to Carbon Monoxide Poisoning Catastrophe,” 2021,
accessed on: 7 December 2022. Available: https://www.texastribune.org/
2021/04/29/texas-carbon-monoxide-poisoning/.
[4] A. Daeli and S. Mohagheghi, “Power grid infrastructural resilience against ex-
treme events,” Energies, vol. 16, no. 1, p. 64, 2022.
[5] R. Eskandarpour and A. Khodaei, “Machine learning based power grid out-
age prediction in response to extreme events,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 3315–3316, 2016.
[6] S. Yang, W. Zhou, S. Zhu, L. Wang, L. Ye, X. Xia, and H. Li, “Failure prob-
ability estimation of overhead transmission lines considering the spatial and
temporal variation in severe weather,” Journal of Modern Power Systems and
Clean Energy, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 131–138, 2019, doi: 10.1007/s40565-017-0370-4.
[7] K. Udeh, D. W. Wanik, D. Cerrai, D. Aguiar, and E. Anagnostou, “Autoregres-
sive modeling of utility customer outages with deep neural networks,” in 2022
IEEE 12th Annual Computing and Communication Workshop and Conference
(CCWC), 2022, pp. 0406–0414.
[8] J. Garland and B. Livneh, “Weather-Induced Power Outage Prediction: A Com-
parison of Machine Learning Models,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference
on Communications, Control, and Computing Technologies for Smart Grids
(SmartGridComm), 2023, pp. 1–6.
22
[9] R. Eskandarpour and A. Khodaei, “Leveraging accuracy-uncertainty tradeoff
in SVM to achieve highly accurate outage predictions,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1139–1141, 2017.
[10] Y. Yao, W. Liu, R. Jain, S. Madasthu, B. Chowdhury, and R. Cox, “Out-
age Forecast-based Preventative Scheduling Model for Distribution System Re-
silience Enhancement,” in 2023 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting
(PESGM), 2023, pp. 1–5.
[11] E. Cruz and T. Munasinghe, “Exploring Power Outage Prediction Using
Weather and Socioeconomic Data in the Southeastern Part of the United
States,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (BigData), 2023,
pp. 6138–6142.
[12] S. M. Lee, J. Y. Choi, G. Jung, A. Tabassum, N. Stenvig, and S. Chinthavali,
“Predicting Power Outage During Extreme Weather with EAGLE-I and NWS
Datasets,” Tech. Rep., Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), Oak Ridge,
TN (United States), 2023.
[13] A. Arif and Z. Wang, “Distribution network outage data analysis and repair
time prediction using deep learning,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference
on Probabilistic Methods Applied to Power Systems (PMAPS), 2018, pp. 1–6.
[14] A. Jaech, B. Zhang, M. Ostendorf, and D. S. Kirschen, “Real-time prediction
of the duration of distribution system outages,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 773–781, 2018.
[15] H. Sun, Z. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Huang, N. Carrington, and J. Liao, “Data-driven
power outage detection by social sensors,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,
vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 2516–2524, 2016.
[16] A. I. Sarwat, M. Amini, A. Domijan, A. Damnjanovic, and F. Kaleem,
“Weather-based interruption prediction in the smart grid utilizing chronologi-
cal data,” Journal of Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy, vol. 4, no. 2,
pp. 1–8, 2016, doi: 10.1007/s40565-015-0120-4.
[17] W. Huang, W. Zhang, Q. Chen, B. Feng, and X. Li, “Prediction algorithm for
power outage areas of affected customers based on CNN-LSTM,” IEEE Access,
2024.
[18] M. Abaas, R. A. Lee, and P. Singh, “Long short-term memory customer-centric
power outage prediction models for weather-related power outages,” in 2022
IEEE Green Energy and Smart System Systems (IGESSC), 2022, pp. 1–6.
[19] X. Wang, N. Fatehi, C. Wang, and M. H. Nazari, “Deep Learning-Based
Weather-Related Power Outage Prediction with Socio-Economic and Power In-
frastructure Data,” in 2024 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting
(PESGM), 2024, pp. 1–5, doi: 10.1109/PESGM51994.2024.10688596.
23
[20] A. K. Onaolapo, R. P. Carpanen, D. G. Dorrell, and E. E. Ojo, “Event-driven
power outage prediction using collaborative neural networks,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 3079–3087, 2022.
[21] M. R. Allen-Dumas, S. Lee, and S. Chinthavali, “Analysis of Correlation be-
tween Cold Weather Meteorological Variables and Electricity Outages,” in 2022
IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), 2022, pp. 3398–3401.
[22] C. Brelsford, S. Tennille, A. Myers, S. Chinthavali, V. Tansakul, M. Denman,
M. Coletti, J. Grant, S. Lee, K. Allen, et al., “A dataset of recorded electricity
outages by United States county 2014–2022,” Scientific Data, vol. 11, no. 1,
p. 271, 2024.
[23] M. Abdelmalak, J. Cox, S. Ericson, E. Hotchkiss, and M. Benidris, “Quantita-
tive resilience-based assessment framework using EAGLE-I power outage data,”
IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 7682–7697, 2023.
[24] A. K. Biswas, H. Varmazyari, and M. H. Nazari, “Data-Driven Energy Re-
silience Assessment and Enhancement in Urban Communities: A Case Study
in Detroit,” Available at SSRN 5151316.
[25] OpenStreetMap contributors, “Planet dump retrieved from https://planet.
osm.org,”
2023,
accessed on Oct. 24,
2023. Available:
https://www.
openstreetmap.org.
[26] M. Mohammadian, F. Aminifar, N. Amjady, and M. Shahidehpour, “Data-
driven classifier for extreme outage prediction based on Bayes decision theory,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 4906–4914, 2021.
[27] P. Branco, L. Torgo, and R. P. Ribeiro, “SMOGN: a pre-processing approach
for imbalanced regression,” in First International Workshop on Learning with
Imbalanced Domains: Theory and Applications, PMLR, 2017, pp. 36–50.
[28] N. Fatehi, Applied machine learning methods for improving energy efficiency
and assessing resilience in smart power grids, Ph.D. dissertation, Wayne State
University, Detroit, USA, 2025.
[29] V. Plevris, G. Solorzano, N. P. Bakas, and M. E. A. Ben Seghier, “Investiga-
tion of performance metrics in regression analysis and machine-learning-based
prediction models,” in 8th European Congress on Computational Methods in
Applied Sciences and Engineering (ECCOMAS Congress 2022), 2022.
[30] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel,
M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, et al., “Scikit-learn: Ma-
chine learning in Python,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12,
pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[31] M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro, G. S. Corrado,
A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin, et al., “TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning
on heterogeneous systems,” 2015.
24
