Deep Learning-Based Weather-Related Power
Outage Prediction with Socio-Economic and Power
Infrastructure Data
Xuesong Wang, Nina Fatehi, Caisheng Wang*, Masoud H. Nazari
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA
xswang@wayne.edu, nina.fatehi@wayne.edu, cwang@wayne.edu, masoud.nazari@wayne.edu
Abstract—This paper presents a deep learning-based approach
for hourly power outage probability prediction within census
tracts encompassing a utility company’s service territory. Two
distinct deep learning models, conditional Multi-Layer Percep-
tron (MLP) and unconditional MLP, were developed to forecast
power outage probabilities, leveraging a rich array of input
features gathered from publicly available sources including
weather data, weather station locations, power infrastructure
maps, socio-economic and demographic statistics, and power
outage records. Given a one-hour-ahead weather forecast, the
models predict the power outage probability for each census tract,
taking into account both the weather prediction and the location’s
characteristics. The deep learning models employed different loss
functions to optimize prediction performance. Our experimental
results underscore the significance of socio-economic factors in
enhancing the accuracy of power outage predictions at the census
tract level.
Index Terms—deep learning, power infrastructure, power out-
age, prediction, socio-economic
I. INTRODUCTION
Modern societies heavily rely on the power grid to supply
continuous power to consumers. Power outages can cause
serious and enormous costs. Extreme weather and natural
disasters, such as hurricanes, wildfires, and floodings, are in-
evitable, which disturb the normal operation of power systems.
According to [1], 44%-78% of the reported power grid outages
are weather-related, and the cost estimates from storm-related
outages to the U.S. economy are between $20 and $55 billion
annually. Therefore, rapid response to such events is crucial.
The response includes preparing for and adapting to changes as
well as quick recovery and restoration from major disruptions
[2]. Therefore, there is a significant need to accurately forecast
the extreme event impacts on the power grid so that utility
crews can be dispatched during or even before the events and
that long-term hardening approaches can be carried out in less
resilient communities.
Deep learning (DL) based models have also been pro-
posed to predict power outages. A Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) is developed in [3] to predict outage duration by
capturing temporal patterns in the outage data during extreme
weather events. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) models
are also developed to predict power load and power outage
*Corresponding author.
probability [4]. In [5], authors compare the performances of
different classification models for power outage prediction,
e.g., Random Forest, Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), Support
Vector Machine, K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), AdaBoost, and
Quadratic Discriminant Analysis models. The authors of [6]
combine Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and LSTM to
predict outages for 10 randomly selected counties across New
York State.
Recently, conditional models have attracted much attention
in AI Generated Content (AIGC) [7], [8]. In conditional
models, a condition is given to the model to modulate the
base features. In the weather-related power outage prediction,
weather data is the base input, and the characteristics of the
location are the condition [9], [10]. Different local conditions,
e.g., infrastructure age and soil conditions, should lead to
various outage probabilities under the same weather condition.
The inputs to the models in the power outage prediction
context usually include weather information, power system
details, environmental conditions, and demographic data [9].
In [11], wind speed and the distance of each component from
the center of hurricane are used. A derived resiliency index
for each component is utilized in [12]. To predict power load,
historical power load data are utilized in [4]. To study the
socio-economic impacts on electricity-vulnerable population
groups, e.g., household income and racial demographics, au-
thors of [13] designed an interactive tool to collect, analyze
and predict power outages in New York City. In power outage
prediction, various targets are employed, such as power outage
occurrence (outage or non-outage) [5], number of customers
who lose power [9] and the ratio of power outage customers
over the population [10]. Sparsity or unbalanced data is
an issue in power outage prediction. To address it, authors
of [14] propose a Majority Under-Sampling and Minority
Over-Sampling strategy to balance the non-outage and outage
samples.
In this paper, we consider two deep learning models, an
unconditional MLP and a conditional MLP, to predict the
number of customers who lose power in an hourly resolution,
normalized by the population of the census tracts. We show
the effectiveness of the conditional model in power outage
predictions. For the input data, we consider not only weather
features, but also the characteristics of the communities (cen-
arXiv:2404.03115v1  [cs.LG]  3 Apr 2024
sus tracts) in the DTE Energy service territory and show how
socio-economic factors impact the power outage predictions.
We also propose using cross-entropy loss function and assign-
ing a large weight to the outage class to mitigate the class
imbalance issue in the dataset and compare the performance
of the weighted cross entropy loss and an exponential loss
on both models. Therefore, our main contribution can be
summarized as follows:
• We have developed two deep learning models, an uncon-
ditional MLP and a conditional MLP, to predict power
outage probability with census tract characteristics as the
conditional input.
• We have compared the performance of the conditional
MLP with unconditional MLP under two different loss
functions: a weighted cross entropy loss and an exponen-
tial loss.
• We have investigated the impact of socio-economic fac-
tors as well as power infrastructure features on power
outage frequencies. The results show that these factors
effectively reduce the error rate in the proposed models.
The remaining sections are arranged as follows: In Section
II, the data collection and preprocessing are discussed. This is
followed by the introduction of the proposed power outage
prediction method in section III. Section IV presents the
performance comparison between the conditional and uncon-
ditional models and various input factors. In Section V, the
conclusion is summarized.
II. DATA COLLECTION AND PREPROCESSING
A. Outage Data
The area under investigation encompasses the DTE’s service
territory in Michigan. Through DTE’s Outage Management
System interface, outage data from Feb. 27, 2023 to Sep. 30,
2023 were collected every 15 minutes. For each power outage
event, we take its first occurrence as the start time and the
last occurrence as the end time. As the spatial coverage and
number of customers may change during the event period, we
take the largest spatial coverage and the maximum number
of customers during its period as its coverage and affected
customers, respectively. To align the power outage events to
the census tract level, a pairwise intersection operation is
executed in ArcGIS Pro, distributing the affected customers
proportionally. The average power outage duration in hours per
capita for each census tract is shown in Fig. 1. After removing
all the power outage events affecting less than or equal to 1
customer, we count the number of customers that lost power in
each hour in the studied period. In total, 1,102 census tracts
are selected, and for each census tract, 5,184 hourly power
outage probabilities are calculated. Note that outages usually
occur after storms or high wind gusts, resulting in the sparsity
of outages in the dataset, i.e., on average 26 out of 5184 hours
are outage hours for all census tracts.
In cases where the number of affected customers surpasses
the population count of the respective census tract, we assign
a probability value of 1. Note that while certain power outage
Fig. 1. The average power outage duration in hours per capita for each census
tract.
Fig. 2. Histogram of the causes of the power outage events.
events may not be solely attributed to weather conditions, we
retain them in the dataset for two primary reasons. Firstly, the
majority of identified event causes are weather-related, such as
wind or ice impacts. Secondly, a substantial number of events
lack a definitive cause within the records, as illustrated in
Fig. 2. We consider the variability present in the power outage
data as a form of data augmentation and a regularization
mechanism for our model.
B. Weather and Weather Station Data
The historical hourly weather data are collected from Au-
tomated Surface Observing System (ASOS).1 We select 10
features from hourly observations, including air temperature,
relative humidity, pressure altimeter, wind speed and direction,
etc. Regarding temperature, humidity, and air pressure data,
missing values are addressed through temporal interpolation.
As for the remaining features, any missing values are filled
with zeros. In cases where observations are missing, we
employ the average of the available data from other weather
stations. Subsequently, the data is normalized by mean and
standard deviation.
C. Power Infrastructure Data
The power infrastructure data are collected from Open Street
Map dataset [15], as shown in Fig. 3. All nodes in the studied
1Downloaded from https://mesonet.agron.iastate.edu/ASOS/
area that have attribute ”power” are collected. The types of
nodes include compensator, generator, insulator, line, pole,
portal, substation, switch, terminal, tower, and transformer.
The number of each feature is counted for census tracts
using ArcGIS Pro. Note that this dataset may not ensure
data completeness. Nonetheless, we consider the inherent
noise within the data as a form of data augmentation and
a regularization technique for our model. Since the detailed
topology of the power distribution network is usually not
publicly available, the Open Street Map data [15] can serve
as a good approximation of the true topology for research
purposes.
D. Socio-economic and Demographic Data
Even when exposed to identical weather conditions, census
tracts with varying levels of resilience are likely to encounter
distinct degrees of power outages. For each census tract, we
collect the following data from the U.S. Census Bureau:
• Total population in 2020
• Household income distribution estimated in 2021
• Distribution of year structure built estimated in 2021
The household income and year structure built data include
both estimations and margins of error. Prior to normalizing
the distribution with Softmax, we employ a data augmentation
technique during model training. This augmentation involves
generating a uniform distribution based on the mean and
margin of error for each data bin.
III. PROPOSED POWER OUTAGE PREDICTION METHOD
We design two model structures, i.e., unconditional and
conditional models. For each model, we utilize two loss
functions, i.e., exponential loss and cross entropy loss. In the
following subsections, we elaborate the proposed models.
A. Conditional MLP Structure
The conditional model comprises two primary branches, as
illustrated in Fig. 4. The first branch takes weather features
and the distances between weather stations and the census
tract as the input. These inputs are then processed through
Fig. 3. Power infrastructure components in the studied area.
several linear and non-linear layers. The second branch re-
ceives four types of inputs: 1) household income distribution,
2) year structure built distribution, 3) power infrastructure
distribution, and 4) totals (including the total population,
total households, total houses, and total power infrastructure
components). These inputs are then processed through a series
of linear and non-linear layers. The output vector generated
by the second branch undergoes a transformation involving
two sets of layers, resulting in a scale vector and a bias
vector. These two vectors are then applied to the output of
the first branch using (1), and the resulting output is further
processed by the final output layer. This design is driven
by the concept that, when confronted with identical weather
conditions, the model should adapt the influence of weather
on the power outage probability for a given census tract
based on its infrastructure conditions. These conditions can be
characterized by features such as the distribution of structure
built years and the attributes of power infrastructure.
Fout = Fin ∗scale + bias
(1)
B. Unconditional MLP Structure
The unconditional model concatenates all input features
into a 1-D vector, subsequently passing it through a series of
alternating linear and non-linear layers. These layers exhibit
a monotonically decreasing number of neurons in each layer.
The structure is shown in Fig. 5.
C. Power Outage Probability Prediction
The prediction target is the probability of power outage
where the values are between 0 and 1. One can naturally think
of using cross entropy loss. Because of the imbalance between
outage and non-outage classes, we put a large weight on the
outage class. The outputs of both models go through a Softmax
layer and the cross entropy losses are calculated by (2), where
N is the number of samples in the training set, Pgt,0 and
Ppred,0 are the probability of non-outage from ground truth
and model prediction, respectively. Also, Pgt,1 and Ppred,1
Fig. 4. Structure of the conditional model, d out=1 for the exponential loss
and d out=2 for the weighed cross entropy loss
Fig. 5.
Structure of the unconditional model, d out=1 for the exponential
loss and d out=2 for the weighed cross entropy loss
Start
Initialize 
 in 
No
 converged?
 = 
(data)
 = 
 = 
End
Yes
: Model
: Model parameters
: Loss function
: Learning rate
: Ground truth
Fig. 6. Model training using back propagation.
are the probability of outage from ground truth and model
prediction, and w is the weight for the outage class (w = 500
in our case).
L = −1
N
X
[Pgt,0 log Ppred,0 + w ∗Pgt,1 log Ppred,1]
(2)
The second loss function employed is an exponential loss
function, as depicted in (3). Here, Pgt and Ppred represent the
probability of power outage in the ground truth and the model
prediction, respectively. The parameter β serves as a scaling
factor to penalize substantial disparities between the prediction
and ground truth (in our instance, β is set to 20).
L = 1
N
X
e|Pgt−Ppred|∗β
(3)
Both models are trained using back propagation as shown
in Fig. 6.
D. Evaluation Metrics
Because the outputs of Sigmoid and Softmax layers cannot
reach 0, model outputs under 0.05 are set to 0 before evalu-
TABLE I
EVALUATION METRICS OF DIFFERENT MODELS AND LOSS FUNCTIONS
Model
Loss Function
MAE
RMSE
unconditional
exponential
0.01346(6.8e-3)
0.04773(1.5e-2)
conditional
exponential
0.0189(6.5e-3)
0.04824(5.2e-3)
unconditional
cross entropy
0.03243(7.1e-4)
0.1179(2.2e-3)
conditional
cross entropy
0.0281(1.3e-3)
0.1131(4.4e-3)
ation. We use Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Root Mean
Squared Error (RMSE) to evaluate the model’s performance,
as shown in (4) and (5).
MAE = 1
N
X
|Pgt −Ppred|
(4)
RMSE =
r
1
N
X
|Pgt −Ppred|2
(5)
IV. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
We partitioned the census tracts in the study area into three
subsets: 72% for the training set, 8% for the validation set, and
20% for the test set. Our evaluation metrics are reported based
on the test sets. The results were averaged over three separate
runs, showcasing both the mean and standard deviations. As
observed in Table I, when the exponential loss function is used,
the unconditional model exhibits lower error, whereas with
the cross-entropy loss, the conditional model demonstrates
superior performance. The variation in performance between
the two models may stem from the choice of hyper-parameters,
such as the selection of the parameter w in the cross-entropy
loss and β in the exponential loss.
Predictions of both models using exponential loss for one
of the census tracts are shown in Fig. 7. As illustrated in
Fig. 7, false positive is the main source of error due to
the data imbalance. A two-stage model might reduce the
false positive prediction by first classifying the outage status
(outage or non-outage) then estimating the outage customer
number. Moreover, a Majority Under-Sampling and Minority
Over-Sampling strategy can be utilized to overcome the class
imbalance problem [14].
To investigate the impacts of different factors on the model
performance, we conducted an ablation study on the uncondi-
tional model. We gradually add more features into the model
input and see the performance variations of the model. The
mean and standard deviation of three runs are reported. The
results are shown in Table II. The inclusion of additional fea-
tures leads to a reduction in prediction errors. The variability
in results for models employing the exponential loss could
potentially be attributed to noise in the household income,
year structure built, and power infrastructure distribution data.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper devised both unconditional and conditional mod-
els to predict power outage probabilities at the census tract
level. To mitigate unbalanced data issue, two distinct loss
functions were implemented: exponential loss and weighted
TABLE II
ABLATION STUDY OF DIFFERENT INPUT FACTORS
Input Factors
Exponential
Cross Entropy
Weather
Distance
Totals
Income
Year Built
Power Infra
MAE
RMSE
MAE
RMSE
✓
0.03547(7.3e-3)
0.0703(4.5e-3)
0.04901(3.5e-3)
0.127(5.6e-3)
✓
✓
0.01916(1.0e-2)
0.05018(1.2e-2)
0.03652(1.6e-3)
0.1231(3.8e-3)
✓
✓
✓
0.01015(4.3e-3)
0.03777(8.7e-3)
0.03662(3.1e-3)
0.1239(5.8e-3)
✓
✓
✓
✓
0.01376(4.4e-3)
0.04874(1.0e-2)
0.0355(2.5e-3)
0.1233(5.4e-3)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
0.01413(6.5e-3)
0.04848(1.0e-2)
0.03235(2.6e-3)
0.1178(4.6e-3)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
0.01346(6.8e-3)
0.04773(1.5e-2)
0.03243(7.1e-4)
0.1179(2.2e-3)
Fig. 7.
Predictions of both models using exponential loss for one of the
census tracts.
cross entropy loss. The results showed that using the ex-
ponential loss results in 5% less MAE in the unconditional
model than the conditional model; however, the weighted cross
entropy loss showed 0.4% less MAE in the conditional model
than the unconditional model. Furthermore, the ablation study,
conducted to investigate the impact of various input features
on the model performance, showed that incorporating socio-
economic factors and power infrastructure features reduced the
model’s prediction error and, therefore, had a positive impact
on the power outage probability prediction.
Future research avenues may involve further feature inte-
gration into the model, exploring the application of LSTM to
leverage historical power outage patterns, or transitioning to
a broader city or county-level analysis as a means to partially
address the data imbalance issue encountered at the finer-
grained census tract level.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We express our gratitude to Mark Furland for generously
supplying the historical DTE outages data.
This material is based upon work supported by the Depart-
ment of Energy, Solar Energy Technologies Office (SETO) Re-
newables Advancing Community Energy Resilience (RACER)
program under Award Number DE-EE0010413. Any opinions,
findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Department of Energy.
REFERENCES
[1] R. J. Campbell and S. Lowry, “Weather-related power outages and
electric system resiliency,” tech. rep., Congressional Research Service,
Library of Congress Washington, DC, 2021.
[2] M. M. Hosseini and M. Parvania, “Artificial intelligence for resilience
enhancement of power distribution systems,” The Electricity Journal,
vol. 34, no. 1, p. 106880, 2021.
[3] A. Jaech, B. Zhang, M. Ostendorf, and D. S. Kirschen, “Real-time
prediction of the duration of distribution system outages,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Power Systems, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 773–781, 2018.
[4] M. Abaas, R. A. Lee, and P. Singh, “Long short-term memory customer-
centric power outage prediction models for weather-related power out-
ages,” in 2022 IEEE Green Energy and Smart System Systems (IGESSC),
pp. 1–6, 2022.
[5] Y. Kor, M. Z. Reformat, and P. Musilek, “Predicting weather-related
power outages in distribution grid,” in 2020 IEEE Power and Energy
Society General Meeting (PESGM), pp. 1–5, 2020.
[6] K. Udeh, D. W. Wanik, D. Cerrai, D. Aguiar, and E. Anagnostou,
“Autoregressive modeling of utility customer outages with deep neural
networks,” in 2022 IEEE 12th Annual Computing and Communication
Workshop and Conference (CCWC), pp. 0406–0414, 2022.
[7] L. Zhang, A. Rao, and M. Agrawala, “Adding conditional control
to text-to-image diffusion models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3836–3847, 2023.
[8] T. Karras, S. Laine, and T. Aila, “A style-based generator architecture
for generative adversarial networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4401–4410,
2019.
[9] P. Arora and L. Ceferino, “Probabilistic and machine learning methods
for uncertainty quantification in power outage prediction due to extreme
events,” EGUsphere, pp. 1–29, 2022.
[10] D. B. McRoberts, S. M. Quiring, and S. D. Guikema, “Improving
hurricane power outage prediction models through the inclusion of local
environmental factors,” Risk analysis, vol. 38, no. 12, pp. 2722–2737,
2018.
[11] R. Eskandarpour and A. Khodaei, “Machine learning based power grid
outage prediction in response to extreme events,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 3315–3316, 2016.
[12] A. Imteaj, M. H. Amini, and J. Mohammadi, “Leveraging decentralized
artificial intelligence to enhance resilience of energy networks,” in 2020
IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), pp. 1–5,
IEEE, 2020.
[13] S. Eckstrom, G. Murphy, E. Ye, S. Acharya, R. Mieth, and Y. Dvorkin,
“Outing power outages: Real-time and predictive socio-demographic
analytics for new york city,” in 2022 IEEE Power and Energy Society
General Meeting (PESGM), pp. 1–5, 2022.
[14] A. Bahrami, M. Shahidehpour, S. Pandey, W. Nation, K. DSouza, and
H. Zheng, “Machine learning application to extreme weather power
outage forecasting in distribution networks using a majority under-
sampling and minority over-sampling strategy,” in 2023 IEEE Power
and Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), pp. 1–6, 2023.
[15] OpenStreetMap
contributors,
“Planet
dump
retrieved
from
https://planet.osm.org,” 2023. Accessed on Oct. 24, 2023.
