applied  
sciences
Article
Data-Driven Prediction Method for Power Grid State
Subjected to Heavy-Rain Hazards
Seongmun Oh 1, Junhyuk Kong 2, Minhee Choi 3 and Jaesung Jung 2,*
1
Energy Conversion Research Laboratory, Korea Electronics Technology Institute, Gwangju 61011, Korea;
sm91@keti.re.kr
2
Department of Energy Systems Research, Ajou University, Suwon 16499, Korea; jhgong8338@ajou.ac.kr
3
Smart Power Distribution Laboratory, KEPCO Research Institute, Daejeon 34056, Korea;
minhee.choi@kepco.co.kr
*
Correspondence: jjung@ajou.ac.kr; Tel.: +82-31-219-2695
Received: 14 May 2020; Accepted: 6 July 2020; Published: 8 July 2020


Abstract: This study presents a machine learning-based method for predicting the power grid state
subjected to heavy-rain hazards. Machine learning models can recognize key knowledge from a
dataset without any preliminary knowledge about the dataset. Hence, machine learning methods have
been utilized for solving power grid-related problems. Two sets of historical data were used herein:
Local weather data and power grid outage data. First, we investigated the heavy-rain-related outage
distribution and analyzed the correlated characteristics between weather and outages to characterize
the heavy rain events. The analysis results show that multiple weather eﬀects are signiﬁcant in
causing power outages, even under heavy-rain conditions. Furthermore, this study proposes a
cost-sensitive prediction method using a support vector machine (SVM) model. The accuracy of the
model was improved by applying a cost-sensitive learning algorithm to the SVM model, which was
subsequently used to predict the state of the grid. The developed model was evaluated using G-mean
values. The proposed method was veriﬁed via actual data of a heavy rain event that occurred in
South Korea.
Keywords: power outage; heavy rain; machine learning; power big data; grid resilience
1. Introduction
The electrical power grid constitutes a vital infrastructural component and serves as an essential
foundation for modern life. Severe weather events have been considered a major cause of enormous
power-outage events. Moreover, the frequency and intensity of severe weather events have increased
over recent years [1–5]. Due to climate change, the frequency, intensity, and duration of extreme
weather are expected to increase further, resulting in large-scale power outages [6] and motivating
this study on grid resilience, deﬁned as the ability to withstand and rapidly recover from a severe
weather event.
A key driver for improving grid resilience is to predict the state of the grid [7]. The grid state
demonstrates how the grid, or its components, performs with respect to severe weather events and
it can determine the operating conditions of the grid. Identiﬁcation of the grid state is an essential
factor in mitigating the impact of severe weather, preparing the emergency response, and managing
the restoration crew within an acceptable time and cost limits. The grid is typically designed to operate
under a certain weather intensity. If the weather intensity increases beyond the design criteria, there
will be an increase in the probability of a power outage. Therefore, the grid state can be represented by
either a normal or outage state, given the weather intensity. Modeling the grid state is very complex;
therefore, the formulation of the relationship and its solution is diﬃcult to determine.
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4693; doi:10.3390/app10144693
www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4693
2 of 14
Data-driven methods can be utilized to model the complex relationship for the grid state; these
methods are time eﬃcient and the components do not require a physical model. Data-driven methods,
such as machine learning (ML) models, can recognize key knowledge from a dataset without any
prior knowledge about the dataset. Thus, ML methods have been utilized to solve power grid-related
problems. ML applications include fault identiﬁcation and detection, based on the support vector
machine or neural network [8,9], and risk analysis [10]. A more prevalent application of ML in
the power grid ﬁeld is in relation to forecasting. Several ML-based forecasting methods have been
introduced for short-term load forecasting [11,12], renewable power forecasting [13,14], electricity
price forecasting [15], and power grid damage forecasting [16–20], which utilize regression models and
tree-based regression. A probabilistic approach based on the Tobit regression model to forecast power
outage was proposed by [21]. A Bayesian network-based storm-induced power outage forecasting
model for an electrical grid was presented in [22]. Predictive analytics for extreme weather events were
presented in [23]. A power system contingency forecasting tool under extreme weather conditions
was presented in [24]. These authors proposed a risk-based security method to predict the risky
contingencies on the power system.
This study presents an ML-based method for predicting the power grid state subjected to
heavy-rain hazards. Two sets of historical data were used: Local weather data and power grid
outage data. First, we investigated the heavy-rain-related outage distribution and analyzed the
correlated characteristics between weather and outages in order to characterize the heavy-rain events.
The analysis results show that multiple weather eﬀects are signiﬁcant in causing power outages, even
under heavy-rain conditions. Furthermore, this study proposes a cost-sensitive prediction method
using the support vector machine (SVM) model. The accuracy of the model was improved by applying
a cost-sensitive learning algorithm to the SVM model, which was subsequently used to predict the
state of the grid. The developed model was evaluated using G-mean values. The proposed method
was veriﬁed using the actual data of a heavy-rain event that occurred in South Korea.
This study is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the related work, Section 3 describes the
used data, Section 4 describes the characteristics of the heavy-rain event, Section 5 presents the method
and materials for the development of the power grid state prediction model, Section 6 presents results
of the actual data, and Section 7 concludes this study.
2. Related Work
Several researchers have studied the grid resilience corresponding to severe weather events.
The linear regression model-based prediction approach was presented in [16,17]. They tried to forecast
the number of damages caused by strong wind or storm events. Various statistical methods, such as
regression tree and multivariate regression, were used to predict power outage durations during a
hurricane [18]. Liu et al. [19,20] developed a linear model-based power outage prediction method
using hurricane variables and environmental variables at a given location. Han et al [25,26] presented
a power-outage estimation model using a similar approach with Liu et al [19,20] but with additional
exploratory variables. Guikema et al. [27] introduced a generalized hurricane outage prediction model
by considering the additional explanatory variables, such as land cover, soil moisture, and hurricane
indicators. Recently, the power grid component state prediction method during hurricane events was
presented in [28,29]. Logistic regression and support vector machines were used to model the power
component state during the hurricane.
Most previous studies focused on hurricane events and their developed models relied on several
grid vulnerability variables and speciﬁc hurricane indicators. However, not all power companies have
detailed data about the power outage caused by weather events and it can be expensive to gather
extensive datasets. Recent studies tried to predict the grid component state during the hurricane
event based on a few weather variables. However, these researches used artiﬁcially generated samples
rather than real power outage data. Therefore, the previous studies have limited its scalability to other
weather events and real applications.
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4693
3 of 14
The objective of this study was to characterize the power outage caused by heavy rain and to
predict grid states during a heavy-rain event based on real data. To be scalable and applicable in reality,
the common weather variables were used to develop a prediction model. Therefore, it can be easily
extended to other disruptive weather events.
3. Description of Data
Heavy-rain hazards can be determined by certain weather conditions. For instance, when the
precipitation over 6 h is expected to be more than 70 mm, the Korea Meteorological Administration
(KMA) issues a special weather report to warn of heavy-rain-related hazards.
The supervised ML approach generally uses previous historical data to build its prediction model.
This study considers the SVM approach to predict the grid states using common weather variables.
Thus, two sets of historical data, local weather and outage data, were used to analyze the power outage.
All the data ranged from January 2008 to March 2018.
In order to evaluate the present power grid state over the subsequent hours, the model required
a numerical weather prediction (NWP) forecast. Therefore, this study considered publicly available
weather data provided by the KMA, which could be associated with South Korea’s NWP system.
NWP forecasts were transformed into a grid state via a machine learning model that was trained by
the historical data to learn the dependence of the output on explanatory variables.
3.1. Weather Station Data
The local weather data was obtained from an automatic weather station (AWS); the weather
variables were recorded at least every hour. The collected data consisted of accumulated rainfall, 1 min
average wind speed, 10 min average wind speed (m/s), wind direction (◦), and humidity (%). For this
study, the accumulated rainfall and 10 min average wind speed were used to analyze the power
outage. These weather variables are the expected cause of power outages under heavy-rain conditions.
Furthermore, when several AWSs were active in a region, this study used the maximum/minimum
weather values as it is the extreme weather conditions that are associated with power outages.
The standard criteria for issuing advisory or warning information concerning extreme weather
conditions in South Korea was investigated to extract the heavy-rain data.
The KMA issues a
special weather report whenever a sudden and signiﬁcant change in weather conditions is observed.
The standard criteria for heavy rain are divided into the advisory level and warning level. The advisory
level means that the precipitation for 6 h is expected to be more than 70 mm or the precipitation for
12 h to be over 110 mm. The warning level means that the precipitation for 6 h is expected to be more
than 110 mm or the precipitation for 12 h to be over 180 mm [30]. In this paper, the standard criteria for
heavy rain were used to extract the heavy rain condition data to predict the grid state.
3.2. Outage Data
The electrical power company in South Korea records the data regarding power outage events in
its branch oﬃces. The outage information includes the details of the head/branch oﬃce, time of failure,
failure component, cause of failure, number of aﬀected customers, the time required for restoration,
and type of failure. The outage is related to the failure components; the location of the failures is not
exactly speciﬁed in the system topology. Despite this limitation, a wider geographical area managed
by each branch oﬃce can be evaluated from the data.
3.3. Integration of Weather and Outage Data
Since local weather data is collected by a diﬀerent institute than outage data, AWS data is required
to be mapped with outage data to analyze the relationship between them. Furthermore, the KMA
provides a detailed regional short-term weather (STW) forecast every 3 h at a dense grid point by
gridding the whole country into 5 × 5 km intervals. The grid state prediction would be performed
using STWs; therefore, the available datasets, with diﬀerent data frames and time periods, required
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4693
4 of 14
integration into 3-h segments to develop the power grid state prediction model. This data frame is
developed to utilize weather forecast data. It allows the proposed method to be extended to other
disruptive weather events.
4. Characterizing Heavy Rain Event
4.1. Outage Pattern
The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) tracked the outage distribution for each power outage
caused by major hurricane events [31]. This research reported that the number of outage customers
rose within a small number of hours of the event. It suggests that the power outage caused by weather
events may be observed to be a general pattern.
Therefore, we can expect that the outage distribution caused by heavy rain may follow a general
pattern, similar to hurricane events. Figure 1 illustrates the normalized damage distribution for several
heavy rain events. These heavy rain event durations and the number of damages were normalized
into between 0 and 1 using its maximum value. Therefore, diﬀerent heavy rain event durations and
the number of damages can be compared over the same axis range. Consequently, Figure 1 shows that
the peak number of damages often occurred close to the end of the heavy rain event time. In the case
of a hurricane, the system experiences a strong weather attack early in the event. Conversely, heavy
rain consistently hits the system with a relatively weak attack, causing the peak outage to occur near
the end of the event. Therefore, it can be concluded that the power outage events may occur due to
prolonged stress caused by accumulated rainfall under heavy-rain conditions.
Figure 1. Number of outage customers for heavy rain events.
4.2. Skewness Distribution of Outage Data
The scarcity of available data on the power grid remains one of the predominant challenges of
studying grid resilience. The occurrence of heavy-rain events is relatively rare and does not always
cause grid damage. Most points on the scatter plot shown in Figure 1 lie on the x-axis, i.e., no outage
cases. The ﬁgure indicates that the grid outage data is not normally distributed, which represents the
skewness of the data distribution. Therefore, the grid outage data has an unbalanced label ratio and
may lead to a deterioration in the performance of the machine learning model.
Due to these issues, a new method is required to capture the inherently complex characteristics of
the imbalanced data and derive knowledge from the data. Innovative research regarding imbalanced
learning issues includes oversampling, undersampling, and cost-sensitive learning methods [32].
Although the application of these techniques can help improve the classiﬁcation results, various
empirical studies have been introduced asserting that cost-sensitive learning is superior to sampling
methods in certain datasets [33]. To achieve an accurate grid state prediction method, this study
considered the SVM model based on a cost-sensitive method for evaluating the grid state under
heavy-rain conditions.
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4693
5 of 14
4.3. Correlated Characteristic between Weather and Outage
Most power components are exposed to weather events that can cause unexpected power outages.
Power components are designed to endure normal intensity weather; however, if the weather intensity
exceeds the power component’s design threshold point, a power outage occurs. In outage data, wind
and rain events are recorded as the causes of power outages and hence it is diﬃcult to specify the exact
type of event that induces the power outage. Moreover, heavy-rain events generate a large amount of
precipitation and sometimes occur simultaneously to strong wind conditions. Therefore, two types of
events must be considered as the cause of power outages under heavy-rain conditions.
There were no historical outage cases predominantly recorded, indicating that the distribution of
outage data was signiﬁcantly distorted. In other words, the dataset has zero-inﬂated characteristics
since the power outage events occur with low probability even under heavy-rain conditions. Therefore,
the probability density distribution of this dataset has a right-skewed distribution rather than the
normal distribution. A log-transformation was performed to improve interpretability and to reduce
the skewness of the data. The zero values of the outage customers were not included when analyzing
the relationship between weather and outages. Figures 2 and 3 show that with higher accumulated
rainfall and wind speed, the number of outage customers tended to be larger. The Pearson correlation
coeﬃcients of rainfall and wind speed with the number of outage customers are calculated as 0.3145
and 0.2354, respectively. The color bar represents the probability density, estimated via the kernel
density estimation method, and the red line represents the regression line of the scatter plot. These
ﬁgures show that major outages occurred with a low probability and minor outages occurred with a
relatively high probability.
Figure 2. Average accumulated rainfall vs. number of outage customers.
Figure 3. Average wind speed vs. the number of outage customers.
To further verify the relationship between the variables, a multivariate regression model was
developed using the two weather variables as inputs. Table 1 shows the R-squared values of each
model with various combinations of explanatory variables. A larger R-squared value indicates that the
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4693
6 of 14
model can capture a larger portion of the variance. Although all models have a low R-squared value,
this analysis suggests that wind speed could help to predict the power outages even under heavy rain
conditions. Moreover, the model with wind and rain has the highest R-squared value, accounting for
8.21% of the variance. This suggests that the multiple weather eﬀect could play an important role in
causing the power outage event.
Table 1. R-squared values of the models.
Wind + Rain
Only Wind
Only Rain
R-squared
0.0821
0.0728
0.03
5. Method and Materials
The grid state can be represented by the normal state or outage state. In this study, we considered
the problem of binary classiﬁcation for predicting the state of the grid, as follows.
Deﬁne a binary event, O as follows:
O =
(
−1; Outage state
+1; Normal state .
(1)
A data-driven method can be used to solve the above binary classiﬁcation problem. SVM models
have been widely used in that ﬁeld, but their model performance is dependent on a dataset. SVM
always guarantees the global optimum and is less prone to overﬁtting than neural network models,
which are also widely used [34]. Moreover, SVM could be suited to small and medium datasets. Severe
weather events and power outage events occur with low probability and therefore, the used dataset in
this study is a relatively smaller dataset than other application ﬁeld datasets, such as image recognition
and natural language. For those reasons, this study utilizes the SVM approach despite SVM not always
guaranteeing the most suitable model.
5.1. SVM
SVM is a general approach to supervised learning for classiﬁcation via the deﬁnition of a separating
hyperplane, which allows discrimination between classes. It is widely used for classifying binary
problems. The optimal hyperplane is considered as the hyperplane with the maximal margin between
the classes, which decreases the probability of misclassiﬁcation and increases the generalization of the
model. The following paragraphs brieﬂy demonstrate the SVM model in three-dimensional space for a
binary classiﬁcation problem. The theoretical details of SVM can be found in the literature [35].
Consider n observations xi ∈R3, i = 1, . . . , n with corresponding target values t1, . . . , tn,
where tn ∈{−1, 1}, and new data points x are classiﬁed according to the sign of y

wTx + b

, where w is
the weight vector that deﬁnes a direction perpendicular to the hyperplane of the decision boundary
plane, while b is a bias that moves the hyperplane parallel to itself. The optimal decision boundary
plane given by the support vector can be found by solving the optimization problem, as follows:
min1
2||w2|| + C
n
X
i=1
ξisubject to
ti

wTxi + b

≥1 −ξiξ i ≥0, i = 1, . . . , n,
(2)
where ξi is a slack variable that regularizes the weight of misclassiﬁed data points inside the margin. C
is a penalty coeﬃcient that controls the trade-oﬀbetween the margin and classiﬁcation error. In the
aforementioned formulation, increasing C toward ∞places more weight on the slack variables ξi,
and the optimization attempts to make a stricter separation, whereas reducing C towards 0 reduces
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4693
7 of 14
the importance of misclassiﬁcation. This ’soft-margin’ formulation can be re-formulated using the
Lagrange multiplier α, as follows:
max −1
2
n
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
αiαjtitjk

xi, xj

+
n
X
i=1
αisubject to 0 ≤α ≤C,
n
X
i=1
αiti = 0.
(3)
The solution of the soft-margin problem is usually found via sequential minimal optimization
(SMO) [36]. SMO iteratively selects and optimizes two Lagrange multipliers until convergence at an
optimal solution.
Figure 4 shows the support vectors and hyperplane in a separable two-class classiﬁcation of SVM.
Figure 4 shows the support vectors and hyperplane for separating outages from no outages, based on
the associated weather variables. The ﬁnding of the best hyperplane assumes that the data is linearly
separable; however, typical data often has non-linear characteristics. The kernel trick can be used to
map the non-linear input space into a linear separable feature space. In this study, we applied the
radial basis kernel trick function, k

xi, xj

. This can be replaced as the dot product of x in another space.
The radial basis function kernel (RBF) can be expressed as follows:
k

xi, xj

= e−1
2σ2 ||xi−xj||2
,
(4)
where σ2 represents the kernel parameter. The best kernel should be found by an experiment while
adjusting kernel parameters via a search method to minimize the error of the model.
Figure 4. Support vector and margin in support vector manchine (SVM).
Furthermore, the performance of the general SVM algorithm tends to be lower for an imbalanced
ratio dataset as the separating boundary tends toward the minority class to obtain better classiﬁcation
accuracy. Therefore, in order to obtain an eﬀective classiﬁcation model, the separating boundary needs
to be pushed toward the majority class and away from the minority class. This is realized through
penalizing the advantages of the majority class for the separating boundary while maximizing the
marginal distance. We deﬁne a cost matrix, C, associated with training observations. For the minority
class, the associated misclassiﬁcation cost, Cij, is relatively large compared to that of the majority
class. The misclassiﬁcation cost penalizes the favors of the separating boundary for the majority class;
therefore, the separating boundary is pushed towards the majority class. Accordingly, the degree to
which the separating boundary is pushed must be determined. The element C(i, j) of this matrix is the
cost of classifying an observation into class j, if the true class is i. The diagonal elements C(i, i) of the
cost matrix must be 0, as follows:
C =
"
0
c
1
0
#
,
(5)
where c > 1 is the cost of misidentifying an outage as no outage. Cost is relative; multiplying the costs,
the separating boundary for the majority class is penalized and the minority class will be preferred.
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4693
8 of 14
5.2. Evaluation Metric
Classiﬁcation accuracy can be measured by the number of correct predictions out of all the
predictions. However, the accuracy may fail to adequately measure the performance of the classiﬁer
due to the presence of imbalanced data. To obtain more accurate classiﬁer information, this study
adopts the G-mean evaluation metric, which represents the geometric mean of the accuracies of each
class. The G-mean ranges from 0 to 1, where 1 indicates a perfect classiﬁer.
For binary classiﬁcation problems, the G-mean represents the square root of the product of a
positive class accuracy and a negative class accuracy. It can be mathematically expressed as follows:
G −mean =
r
TP
TP + FP ×
TN
TN + FP,
(6)
where TP, TN, FP, and FN represent the true positive, true negative, false positive, and false
negative, respectively.
6. Results
The data range used for this study was from 2008 through to 2018; a historical dataset up to mid
of 2016 was used to develop the prediction model and the remaining historical dataset was used to
evaluate the performance of the prediction model. Furthermore, the parameters (kernel parameter
(σ2) and penalty coeﬃcient (C)) of the SVM model were tuned using Bayesian optimization. In total,
30 trials were conducted to ﬁnd the best combination of the parameters with a minimum classiﬁcation
error of 5-fold cross-validation. A search for the C log-scaled in the range between 1e-3 and 1e3 and
σ2 log-scaled in the range between 1e-3 and 1e3 was performed to ﬁnd the best parameters of SVM.
The G-mean values were evaluated for each of the 10 available explanatory variables to identify the
key explanatory variables as shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Available explanatory variables.
Variable Name
Average wind speed
x1
Maximum wind speed
x2
Minimum wind speed
x3
Average wind direction
x4
Maximum wind direction
x5
Minimum wind direction
x6
Average accumulated rainfall
x7
Maximum accumulated rainfall
x8
Minimum accumulated rainfall
x9
12 h accumulated rainfall
x10
The complexity of the model may lead to overﬁtting and a computational burden and inadequate
variables can decrease the performance of the model. Thus, in this study, variables were selected
by adding variables sequentially and the model with the highest performance was selected as the
ﬁnal model. Moreover, the degree of misclassiﬁcation cost was determined to obtain an appropriate
separating boundary. First, this study applied the reference ratio of the cost, 0.618:1 (the golden
standard), between minority classes and the majority classes, as follows:
C =


0
0.618/n

tj

1/n(ti)
0

,
(7)
where tj and ti are the minority and majority class, respectively.
Twenty percent of the historical dataset was used to evaluate the performance of the proposed
method. Based on the cost matrix C, the SVM models with a combination of weather variables were
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4693
9 of 14
developed and their G-mean values are summarized in Table 3. Based on the average accumulated
rainfall, x7, other variables were added sequentially. In Table 3, the G-mean values tend to decrease
with the addition of the wind direction-related variables, x5, x6. It implies that wind direction is not
a substantial factor for power grid outage subjected to heavy rain hazards. Conversely, the G-man
values tend to increase with the addition of the wind speed-related variable, x1, x2, x3. This means
that wind speeds have a substantial impact on the power grid even under heavy-rain conditions.
Consequently, the SVM model with x1, x2, x3, x7, x9 recorded the highest G-mean values. This model is
not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared to the others; however, it is superior to other models.
Table 3. G-mean value with a combination of variables.
Variables
G-mean
x1, x7
0.64689
x1, x3, x7
0.67963
x1, x2, x3, x7
0.69427
x1, x2, x3, x7, x9
0.70572
x1, x2, x3, x6, x7, x9
0.55672
x1, x2, x3, x4, x6, x7, x9
0.60430
x1, x2, x3, x4, x6, x7, x9, x10
0.43253
x1, x2, x3, x4, x6, x7, x8, x9, x10
0.49495
x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6, x7, x8, x9, x10
0.56860
To further improve the SVM model performance and analyze the eﬀect of misclassiﬁcation cost,
the costs were explored with the variables x1, x2, x3, x7, x9. A grid search for the misclassiﬁcation costs
c, {1, 1.5, 2, 0, . . . ., 11, 11.5} was performed to ﬁnd the optimal separating boundary that properly
classiﬁes the majority class and minority class. Figure 5 shows the G-mean values with cost values.
As shown in this ﬁgure, when the cost value was 1, the G-mean value was recorded as 0. This implies
the general SVM model without the cost matrix so that the separating boundary of the model was
placed towards the minority class to obtain better classiﬁcation accuracy. This results in the separating
boundary being pushed toward the majority class by the high misclassiﬁcation cost. This is realized by
penalizing the advantages of the majority class for the separating boundary while maximizing the
marginal distance.
Figure 5. G-mean values vs. cost values.
Increasing misclassiﬁcation costs can have the eﬀect of moving the separating boundary away
from the minority class. According to the misclassiﬁcation cost, a biased separating boundary can be
obtained. Therefore, the G-mean value, where the true positive rate and true negative rate are similar,
is an appropriate result. The G-mean value for a misclassiﬁcation cost of 11 was calculated as the
maximum and it also has the highest true positive rate and true negative rate in the grid search range.
Consequently, the highest G-mean value was recorded as 0.7188 with a misclassiﬁcation cost of 11.
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4693
10 of 14
This is superior to the best model shown in Table 3. Therefore, this study used the SVM model with a
cost of 11 to demonstrate the overall model performance.
Table 4 shows the confusion matrix of the SVM models, with the variables x1, x2, x3, x7, x9 and
cost of 11 and Table 5 shows the SVM models’ performance. The other typical classiﬁcation models
(SVM with the linear and polynomial kernel, multilayer perceptron, decision tree, random forecast,
logistic regression) were also trained and tested in the same fashion (i.e., their hyperparameters with
misclassiﬁcation cost were searched and selected to obtain the best performance). The results show that
the normal state prediction accuracy was 70.93%, the outage prediction accuracy was 72.83%, and the
SVM with RBF had an overall prediction accuracy with a G-mean of 0.7188. Whereas, the random forest
can classify with a G-mean of 0.7000, which is the most superior model except for SVM. The results
indicate that the obtained decision boundary using the cost-sensitive SVM could be used to adequately
predict the grid state for future heavy-rain events.
Table 4. Confusion matrix of the proposed SVM model.
Predicted Normal
Predicted Outage
Actual Normal
1945
797
Actual Outage
72
193
Table 5. Comparison of the performance between the SVM and other classiﬁciation models.
True Positive Rate
True Negative Rate
G-Mean
SVM (RBF)
0.7093
0.7283
0.7188
SVM (Linear)
0.6402
0.7344
0.6857
SVM (Polynomial)
0.6641
0.6971
0.6804
Multilayer
perceptron
0.6757
0.7095
0.6924
Decision Tree
0.7101
0.6722
0.6909
Random Forest
0.7028
0.6971
0.7000
Logistic regression
0.6652
0.7220
0.6930
Predicted results are shown based on administrative areas since the branch oﬃce areas are close
to the administrative areas and it is a convenient method of displaying the spatial distribution of
the results. In order to show the spatial distribution of the proposed method, it was used to predict
a new heavy-rain event in October 2016. Figure 6 shows the study area. The actual heavy-rain
event lasted 15 h; however, for simplicity, the prediction results show only the ﬁnal nine hours of
heavy rain. Figure 7 shows the spatial distribution of the actual and predicted grid state. The black
boundary represents the no heavy-rain event for administrative areas and the red and white boundaries
represent the outage and normal grid state, respectively. As shown in Figure 7, the proposed method
demonstrated adequate prediction performance, however, it does not represent a perfect classiﬁer.
This may be due to a signiﬁcant number of normal grid states mispredicted as outage grid states.
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4693
11 of 14
Figure 6. Study area.
Figure 7. Comparison between the spatial distribution of actual grid state and forecasted grid state for
heavy rain in October 2016.
However, the proposed method does predict a grid state similar to the actual grid state and the
overall predicted grid states follow a similar spatial pattern to the actual grid states. Hence, it can be
concluded that the proposed method can be utilized to mitigate the impact of heavy rain by issuing an
alarm for high-risk areas in advance.
7. Conclusions
This study presents a machine learning-based method for predicting the power grid state subjected
to heavy-rain hazards. This study used two sets of data: Local weather data and power distribution grid
damage data, from January 2008 to March 2018. To understand the heavy-rain event, we investigated
the heavy-rain-related outage distribution and analyzed the correlated characteristics between weather
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4693
12 of 14
and outages. The results show that the eﬀect of wind speed is signiﬁcant in causing power outages,
even under heavy-rain conditions.
Furthermore, this study proposed a grid state prediction method using a cost-sensitive support
vector machine (SVM) model. The penalty and kernel parameters of SVM were optimized using
Bayesian optimization. The accuracy of the model was improved by applying a cost-sensitive learning
algorithm to the SVM model, which was subsequently used to predict the grid state of a region managed
by a branch oﬃce. The developed models were evaluated using the G-mean values. The proposed
method was veriﬁed using the actual data of heavy-rain events that occurred in South Korea. The results
show that the SVM model with cost-sensitive eﬀects outperforms the general SVM model.
The method proposed in this study is useful in predicting the grid state during heavy-rain
events. This study is expected to provide insight into heavy-rain events, as well as damage prediction.
Moreover, the proposed method can be extended to other disruptive events since it only relies on the
simple weather variable provided by the weather forecast system. Moreover, the condition of power
components and weather are changing over time. Thus, future study is needed to develop grid state
prediction models to generalize and reﬂect the changes in the grid conditions over time.
Author Contributions: S.O.; writing the original version, methodology, analysis, and interpretation of data,
investigation, and conception. J.K.; visualization, analysis, validation. M.C.; sources, data collection. J.J.;
conception, supervisory, submitting corresponding and corrections, submit the ﬁnal approval of the version.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work is ﬁnancially supported by Korea Ministry of Environment (MOE) as Graduate School
specialized in Climate Change. This work was supported by the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation
and Planning (KETEP) granted ﬁnancial resource from the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy, Republic of
Korea (No. 20171210000210).
Acknowledgments: The authors declare no acknowledgments.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Elsner, J.B.; Kossin, J.P.; Jagger, T.H. The increasing intensity of the strongest tropical cyclones. Nature 2008,
455, 2–5. [CrossRef]
2.
Emanuel, K. Increasing destructiveness of tropical cyclones over the past 30 years. Nature 2005, 436, 686–688.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Deo, A.A.; Ganer, D.W. Tropical Cyclone Activity over the Indian Ocean in the Warmer Climate. In Monitoring
and Prediction of Tropical Cyclones in the Indian Ocean and Climate Change; Mohanty, U.C., Mohapatra, M.,
Singh, O.P., Bandyopadhyay, B.K., Rathore, L.S., Eds.; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2014; pp. 72–73.
4.
Venkata, S.S.M.; Hatziargyriou, N. Grid Resilience: Elasticity Is Needed When Facing Catastrophes.
IEEE Power Energy Mag. 2015, 13, 16–23. [CrossRef]
5.
Hanif, F.; Widiputra, V.; Jung, J. State-of-the-art review on power grid resilience to extreme weather events:
Deﬁnitions, frameworks, quantitative assessment methodologies, and enhancement strategies. Appl. Energy
2019, 239, 1049–1065.
6.
Kezunovic, M.; Dobson, I.; Dong, Y. Impact of Extreme Weather on Power System Blackouts and Forced
Outages:
New Challenges.
In Proceedings of the 7th Balkan Power Conference, Šibenik, Croatia,
10–12 September 2008; pp. 1–5.
7.
Jufri, F.H.; Kim, J.S.; Jung, J. Analysis of determinants of the impact and the grid capability to evaluate and
improve grid resilience from extreme weather event. Energies 2017, 10, 1779. [CrossRef]
8.
Thukaram, D.; Khincha, H.; Vijaynarasimha, H. Artiﬁcial neural network and support vector machine
approach for locating faults in radial distribution system. IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 2005, 20, 710–721.
[CrossRef]
9.
Jufri, F.Z.; Oh, S.; Jung, J. Development of Photovoltaic abnormal condition detection system using combined
regression and Support Vector Machine. Energy 2019, 176, 457–467. [CrossRef]
10.
Guikema, S.D. Natural disaster risk analysis for critical infrastructure systems: An approach based on
statistical learning theory. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2009, 94, 855–860. [CrossRef]
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4693
13 of 14
11.
Chen, Y.; Chu, Y.; Wu, Y.; Bao, Y.; Xu, P.; Li, W.; Ni, L.; Wang, K. Short-term electrical load forecasting using
the Support Vector Regression (SVR) model to calculate the demand response baseline for oﬃce buildings.
Appl. Energy 2017, 195, 659–670. [CrossRef]
12.
Lu, C.; Wu, H.; Vemuri, S. Neural network based short term load forecasting. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 1993, 8,
336–342. [CrossRef]
13.
Bhaskar, K.; Singh, S.N. AWNN-Assisted Wind Power Forecasting Using Feed-Forward Neural Network.
IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy 2012, 3, 306–315. [CrossRef]
14.
Jufri, F.Z.; Jung, J. Photovoltaic Generation Forecasting Using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks Model with Input
Variables and Model Parameters Selection Algorithm in Korea. Int. J. Mach. Learn. Comput. 2017, 7, 156–161.
[CrossRef]
15.
Hanif, F.; Seongmun, J.; Jaesung, O. Day-Ahead System Marginal Price Forecasting Using Artiﬁcial Neural
Network and Similar Days Information. J. Electr. Eng. Technol. 2019, 14, 561–568.
16.
Oh, S.; Jung, J.; Jufri, F.H.; Choi, M. Predicting the Damage of Distribution System by Strong Wind.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Innovative Smart Grid Technologies—Asia (ISGT Asia), Chengdu, China,
21–24 May 2019; pp. 3970–3974.
17.
Jufri, F.H.; Oh, S.; Jung, J.; Choi, M.A. Method to Forecast Storm-Caused Distribution Grid Damages Using
Cost-Sensitive Regression Algorithm. In Proceedings of the IEEE Innovative Smart Grid Technologies—Asia
(ISGT Asia), Chengdu, China, 21–24 May 2019; pp. 3986–3990.
18.
Nateghi, R.; Guikema, S.D.; Quiring, M. Comparison and Validation of Statistical Methods for Predicting
Power Outage Durations in the Event of Hurricanes. Risk Anal. 2011, 31, 1897–1906. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.
Liu, H.; Davidson, R.A.; Rosowsky, D.V.; Stedinger, J.R. Negative Binomial Regression of Electric Power
Outages in Hurricanes. J. Infrastruct. Syst. 2005, 11, 258–267. [CrossRef]
20.
Liu, H.; Davidson, R.A.; Apanasovich, T.V. Spatial generalized linear mixed models of electric power outages
due to hurricanes and ice storms. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2008, 93, 875–890. [CrossRef]
21.
Mensah, A.F.; Duenas-Osorio, L. Outage predictions of electric power systems under Hurricane winds by
Bayesian networks. In Proceedings of the 2014 International Conference on Probabilistic Methods Applied
to Power Systems (PMAPS), Durham, UK, 7–10 July 2014; pp. 1–6.
22.
Singhee, A.; Wang, H. Probabilistic forecasts of service outage counts from severe weather in a distribution
grid. In Proceedings of the IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting, Chicago, IL, USA, 16–20 July 2017;
pp. 1–5.
23.
Kezunovic, M.; Obradovic, Z.; Dokic, T.; Zhang, B.; Stojanovic, J.; Dehghanian, P.; Chen, P.-C. Predicting
Spatiotemporal Impacts of Weather on Power Systems Using Big Data Science BT. In Data Science and Big
Data: An Environment of Computational Intelligence; Pedrycz, W., Chen, S.-M., Eds.; Springer International
Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2017; Volume 24, pp. 265–299.
24.
Ciapessoni, E.; Cirio, D.; Pitto, A.; Sforna, M. A probabilistic risk-based security assessment tool allowing
contingency forecasting. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Probabilistic Methods
Applied to Power Systems (PMAPS), Boise, ID, USA, 24–28 June 2018; pp. 1–6.
25.
Han, S.R.; Guikema, S.D.; Quiring, S.M. Improving the predictive accuracy of hurricane power outage
forecasts using generalized additive models. Risk Anal. 2009, 29, 1443–1453. [CrossRef]
26.
Han, S.R.; Guikema, S.D.; Quiring, S.M.; Lee, K.H.; Rosowsky, D.; Davidson, R.A. Estimating the spatial
distribution of power outages during hurricanes in the Gulf coast region. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2009, 94,
199–210. [CrossRef]
27.
Guikema, S.D.; Nateghi, R.; Quiring, S.M.; Staid, A.; Reilly, A.C.; Gao, M. Predicting Hurricane Power
Outages to Support Storm Response Planning. IEEE Access 2014, 2, 1364–1373. [CrossRef]
28.
Eskandarpour, R.; Khodaei, A. Machine Learning Based Power Grid Outage Prediction in Response to
Extreme Events. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2017, 32, 3315–3316. [CrossRef]
29.
Eskandarpour, R.; Khodaei, A.; Arab, A. Improving power grid resilience through predictive outage estimation.
In Proceedings of the North American Power Symposium, Morgantown, WV, USA, 17–19 September 2017;
pp. 1–5.
30.
Korea Meteorological Administration.
Available online: http://www.kma.go.kr/eng/weather/forecast/
standard_warning_info.jsp (accessed on 06 July 2020).
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4693
14 of 14
31.
EOP (Executive Oﬃce of the President). Economic Beneﬁts of Increasing Electric Grid Resilience to Weather
Outages. Available online: https://www.energy.gov/downloads/economic-beneﬁts-increasing-electric-grid-
resilience-weather-outages (accessed on 06 July 2020).
32.
He, H.; Garcia, E. Learning from imbalanced data. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 2009, 21, 1263–1284.
33.
McCarthy, K.; Zabar, B.; Weiss, G.M. Does Cost-Sensitive Learning Beat Sampling for Classifying Rare
Classes? In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Utility-Based Data Mining, Chicago, IL, USA,
21 August 2005; pp. 69–77.
34.
Burges, C.J.C. A Tutorial on Support. Vector Machines for Pattern Recognition; Kluwer Academic Publishers:
Berlin, Germany, 1998; Volume 167, pp. 121–167.
35.
Hastie, T.; Tibshirani, R.; Friedman, J. The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction,
2nd ed.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2009.
36.
Platt, J. Sequential minimal optimization: A fast algorithm for training support vector machines. In Advances
in Kernel Method: Support Vector Learning; Scholkopf, B., Smola, A., Eds.; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA,
1998; pp. 185–208.
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
